Speaking and Writing Strategies for the  TOEFL iBT Bruce Stirling Copyright  2009 by Bruce Stirling All rights reserved.

Duplication, distribution or database storage of any part of this work by any means is prohibited without prior written approval of the publisher.

G+3TiC=C and OPDUL=C are registered trademarks.

For permission to use material from this text or CD, please forward your request to info@novapress.net.

ISBN-10: 1-889057-58-4 ISBN-13: 978-1-889057-58-3 Speaking and Writing Strategies for the TOEFL iBT On the web at www.argumentmapping.com This text is also available as a phone app.

Visit www.novapress.net or iTunes for more information.

Nova Press 11659 Mayfield Avenue Los Angeles, CA USA 90049 1-800-949-6175 info@novapress.net www.novapress.net TOEFL is a registered trademark of Educational Testing Services (ETS), Princeton, New Jersey, USA. The material in this text, including argument maps, speaking and writing prompts, speaking and writing strategies, speaking and writing sample responses, and the proficiency checklists and rating guides, were created and designed exclusively by the author, Bruce Stirling. This publication is not endorsed or approved by ETS.

Contents DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT Arguments and the TOEFL iBT What is an Argument?

Personal-Opinion Argument: Deduction Rhetorical Strategies Personal-Opinion Argument: Induction Developing Your Opinion Fact-Based Argument: Deduction Fact-Based Argument: Induction Coherence = A High Score Argument Mapping G+3TiC=C TASK ORDER WRITING TASKS INDEPENDENT ESSAY G+3TiC=C Basic Independent Essay Agree-Disagree Prompts OPDUL=C Preference Prompts Compare - Contrast Prompts Advantage-Disadvantage Prompts Advantage Prompts Disadvantage Prompts Reason Prompts Quality Prompts Writing Practice Advanced Introduction Strategies Simple Hooks Complex Hooks Advanced Thesis Strategies Pre dictor Thesis Writing a Predictor Thesis Predictor Thesis: Parallelism Gerund Predictor Thesis Predictor Thesis: Using Synonyms 1 Predictor Thesis: When to Write 2 Predictor Thesis: When to Write Advanced Conclusion Strategies Advanced Independent Essays Emergency Independent Essay Contrarian Independent Essay Writing Practice What Have You Learned?

INTEGRATED ESSAY Argument-Counter Argument Essay OPDUL+C ETSs Testing Method 1 Argument-Counter Argument Essay: Step-by-Step The Black-and-White Rule Organization: Point-by-Point Style Organization: Block Style Paraphrasing 2 Argument-Counter Argument Essay: Step-by-Step Three Common Problems Writing Practice Show-Support Essay Show Support Essay: Step-by-Step Writing Practice Emergency Integrated Essay152 What Have You Learned?

SPEAKING TASKS SPEAKING TASK ONE Independent Task: Single-Question Prompt OPDUL=C Delivery Speaking Subjectively Basic Response 1 Basic Response: Step-by-Step Rating Yourself Rating in a Class How Long Should My Response Be?

2 Basic Response: Step-by-Step 3 Basic Response: Step-by-Step Four Common Problems Help! - My Response is Too Long!

Help! - My Response is Too Short!

Advanced Strategies Advanced Introduction Strategies Predictor Thesis The Rhetorical Why Advanced Conclusion Strategies Advanced Responses Emergency Response Contrarian Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

SPEAKING TASK TWO Independent Task: Paired-Choice Prompt 1 Agree-Disagree Prompt: Step-by-Step 2 Agree-Disagree Prompt: Step-by-Step Support-Dont Support Prompt: Step-by-Step Preference Prompt: Step-by-Step Argument-Counter Argument: Step-by-Step Advantage-Disadvantage: Step-by-Step Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

SPEAKING TASK THREE Integrated Task: Read-Listen-Speak OPDUL=C ETSs Testing Method Developing a Response: Step-by-Step How Long Should My Response Be?

Five Common Problems Help! - My Response is Too Long!

Help! - My Response is Too Short!

Emergency Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

SPEAKING TASK FOUR Integrated Task: Read-Listen-Speak ETSs Testing Method Developing a Response: Step-by-Step How Long Should My Response Be?

Four Common Problems Emergency Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

SPEAKING TASK FIVE Integrated Task: Listen-Speak ETSs Testing Method Developing a Response: Step-by-Step How Long Should My Response Be?

Contrarian Response Three Common Problems Emergency Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

SPEAKING TASK SIX Integrated Task: Listen-Speak ETSs Testing Method Developing a Response: Step-by-Step How Long Should My Response Be?

Three Common Problems Emergency Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

APPENDIX SCORING Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist Independent Essay Rating Guide Integrated Essay Proficiency Checklist Integrated Essay Rating Guide Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist Independent Speaking Rating Guide Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist Integrated Speaking Rating Guide EXERCISES Identifying Rhetorical Strategies Identifying Opinions Checking for Parallelism Gerund Predictors ANSWER KEY Identifying Rhetorical Strategies Identifying Opinions Checking for Parallelism Gerund Predictors INDEPENDENT ESSAY RATINGS Agree-Disagree Prompt Preference Prompt Compare - Contrast Prompt Advantage-Disadvantage Prompt Advantage Prompt Disadvantage Prompt Reason Prompts Quality Prompt Advanced Independent Essays INTEGRATED ESSAY RATINGS SPEAKING TASK RATINGS Audio Scripts Glossary Also From Nova Press TOEFL iBT Facts 1. The TOEFL iBT is an English language proficiency test. TOEFL tests academic English language proficiency. For TOEFL, academic English means first year, college-level English.

2. TOEFL means test of English as a foreign language. iBT means internet-based test. Internet-based means the test computers are connected to the internet. Your answers will be sent via the internet to be scored by ETS.

3. The TOEFL iBT is designed and implemented by Educational Testing Services (ETS) Princeton, New Jersey, USA.

4. You cannot pass or fail the TOEFL test. You will get a score out of 120 total points. Your score measures your English language proficiency.

The higher your score, the higher your English language proficiency.

5. The TOEFL iBT is divided into four test sections. You cannot change the task order.

6. Before you take the TOEFL test, find out the TOEFL requirements of the school to which you are applying. Some U.S. colleges and universities do not require a TOEFL score.

7. In some countries, you can take the TOEFL PBT (paper-based test). If you want to go to graduate school in the United States, do not take the PBT. Take the iBT instead. Why? Because graduate and post graduate students at U.S. universities are expected to teach undergraduate classes. That means you must be able to speak academic English proficiently. That is what the iBT tests. The PBT does not test speaking.

8. In the United States, you can register for the TOEFL iBT online or by phone. Visit www.ets.org for registration information. In the United States, the busiest registration times are at the end of each school semester when TOEFL courses end and TOEFL students are ready to take the test. The TOEFL test is very popular. Register as early as possible.

9. You can take notes during the test. Pencils and paper will be supplied.

You cannot use your own pencil or paper. After the test, you must give your notes to the test site manager.

10. Expect to use an old-style Microsoft keyboard when you take the test.

11. Your TOEFL iBT score is good for two years. You cannot renew your TOEFL score. You must retake the test and get a new score. For more TOEFL information, visit www.ets.org Acknowledgements The author would like to thank Gretchen Anderson, Lou-Ann Riccio, Jennie Farnell, Graciela Sauro, Ewa Jasinska, and Diana Bermudez for their comments and suggestions. The author would also like to thank Patricia Stirling, Bill Foster, Liz Foster, Ami Kothari, Gretchen Anderson, Ivo Draganac, and Jon Conine for contributing to the audio CD.

Special thanks to Jeff Kolby at Nova Press for his support.

To the Test-Taker At the start of each new semester, my TOEFL students always ask me, What is the trick to getting a high TOEFL iBT score? Unfortunately, there is no trick. However, there is a strategy that can help you increase your speaking and writing scores and thus increase your TOEFL iBT score.

That strategy is called argument mapping. The idea behind argument mapping is simple: test-takers acquire speaking and writing strategies faster and more proficiently if they can visualize them. Knowing this, I designed the argument map for the TOEFL iBT.

What is an argument map? An argument map works just like a road map. A road map is a guide that uses lines and arrows to point you in the right direction so you wont get lost. An argument map does the same thing; however, instead of guiding you along highways and byways, an argument map will guide you through each speaking and writing task from start to finish. On the way, each argument map will tell you (depending on the task) what to say or write, where to say or write it, how to say or write it, and why. This, in turn, will maximize scoring. Because you are following a map, you will also save time and, more importantly, you will never get lost.

Best of all, you can develop and deliver responses for all six speaking tasks and both writing tasks using the same argument map.

Mapping out verbal and written arguments, however, is only step one. Step two is knowing how to rate (score) your responses like a TOEFL rater. You will learn how to do that using a unique new argument analyzer in combination with user-friendly rating guides. By doing so, you can target those parts of your arguments that need revising when you practice. This will help you maximize scoring and make you test ready. Test ready means that on test day you will give the speaking and writing raters exactly what they are trained to look for: six coherent verbal arguments and two coherent written arguments.

Bruce Stirling Developing an Argument Arguments and the TOEFL iBT The TOEFL iBT consists of four test sections: reading, listening, speaking and writing. Because the reading and listening questions are all multiple-choice questions, they are called selective tasks. In contrast, the speaking and writing tasks are called constructive tasks. For TOEFL, to construct means to develop and deliver. What do you have to develop and deliver on test day? Six verbal arguments and two written arguments.

Why does ETS use arguments to test your ability to speak and write academic English? Because at an English-speaking university, you will construct personal-opinion arguments, verbally and in writing (independent speaking tasks #1 and #2; independent writing task). You will also listen to and summarize lectures. Lectures are fact-based arguments (integrated writing task; integrated speaking task #4 and #6). You will also read and summarize fact-based arguments (integrated writing task; integrated speaking tasks #4 and #6).

As you can see, ETS uses arguments to test your ability to speak and write English academically. Therefore, to get high speaking and writing scores on the TOEFL iBT, you must know how to construct and summarize both personal-opinion and fact-based arguments, quickly and proficiently. You can do so using the strategy called argument mapping. Argument mapping begins with a review of basic argument development.

What is an Argument?

An argument is the process of presenting an opinion for the purpose of persuading an audience. For TOEFL, this type of argument is called a personal-opinion argument. An argument, however, does not always have to persuade. An argument can also inform by presenting facts. For TOEFL, this type of argument is called a fact-based argument. An argument that successfully persuades or informs demonstrates coherence. Coherence means that the argument is clear and logical. For TOEFL, a coherent argument is a high-scoring argument. A coherent argument demonstrates English language proficiency. Proficiency means skill and knowledge. How can you quickly and proficiently construct both personal-opinion and fact-based arguments that demonstrate coherence? By starting with a clear method of organization. There are two ways to organize an argument: deduction and induction. Lets start with the personal-opinion argument and deduction.

Personal-Opinion Argument: Deduction Read the following dialogue.

Jane: Hi, Mary. How was California?

Mary: California was the best trip ever. I learned how to surf at Malibu. At first, I kept falling off, but I kept trying and soon I could do it. It was great. And the sights.

Jane: Tell me.

Mary: I visited Hollywood first, Disneyland next, and Catalina Island last. There is so much to see and do. I was exhausted. Did I tell you about Jack?

Jane: Jack?

Mary: I met him at Venice Beach. Hes a movie producer. Hes so handsome. As a matter of fact, were having dinner tonight. Tomorrow, were flying back to L.A. to get married!

Jane: Sounds like you had a good time.

Mary: I had a fabulous time.

This is just an everyday conversation, right? Right. It is also an personal-opinion argument. How do we know it is a personal-opinion argument? We know because Mary starts her argument by stating her opinion about California. Note: An opinion is also called a general statement.

Mary: California was the best trip ever = opinion (general statement) Next, Mary supports her opinion with three examples. Examples are also called supporting illustrations. Notice how each supporting illustration develops a reason why California was the best trip ever.

example #1 I learned how to surf at Malibu. At first, I kept falling off, but I kept trying and soon I could do it. It was great.

example #2 And the sights. I visited Hollywood first, Disneyland next, and Catalina Island last. There is so much to see and do. I was exhausted.

example #3 Did I tell you about Jack? I met him at Venice Beach. Hes a movie producer. Hes so handsome. As a matter of fact, were having dinner tonight. Tomorrow, were flying back to L.A. to get married!

Finally, Mary makes a conclusion based on her opinion and her examples.

Mary: I had a fabulous time = conclusion Where did Mary have a fabulous time? In California, of course.

When you make a conclusion based on your opinion and your supporting examples, you are using deduction as a method of organization.

By mapping out Marys dialogue, we can see how she uses deduction as a method of organizing her personal-opinion argument. Note how the opinion is called general. Notice also how the examples are called specific.

Notice how Marys conclusion confirms her opinion and takes us right back to the start. The speaking and writing raters will look for this closed or formal structure. Why? Because it shows that you are using deduction as a method of organizing your personal-opinion argument, be it written or verbal. By adding transitions (connecting words), we can change Marys verbal personal-opinion argument into a written personal-opinion argument.

California was the best trip ever.

For example, I learned how to surf at Malibu. At first, I kept falling off, but I kept trying and soon I could do it. It was great.

And the sights. I visited Hollywood first, Disneyland next, and Catalina Island last. There is so much to see and do. I was exhausted.

Also, did I tell you about Jack? I met him at Venice Beach. Hes a movie producer. Hes so handsome.

As a matter of fact, were having dinner tonight.

Tomorrow, were flying back to L.A. to get married!

In conclusion, I had a fabulous time.

TOEFL calls this written personal-opinion argument an independent essay.

Yes, this independent essay is short and simple; nevertheless, it demonstrates coherence. Why? Because it starts with a clear method of organization in which Mary states her opinion about California, supports it with examples and reasons, then makes a conclusion based on her opinion and examples. Marys argument also demonstrates a variety of rhetorical strategies.

Rhetorical Strategies Rhetorical strategies are tools. A carpenter uses a hammer to build a house.

A painter uses a brush to paint a landscape. Speakers and writers use rhetorical strategies to develop arguments. For TOEFL, you need to learn the following eight rhetorical strategies: narration, process, description, illustration, compare-and-contrast, cause-and-effect, definition, classification.

1. Narration Narration describes the passing of time. When we arrange events according to time, we put them in chronological or time order, for example: a. Yesterday, Fatima got up at seven oclock and took a shower. After that she had breakfast, then rode the bus to work. When she got to work, she checked her email, then discussed the new business plan with her colleagues.

b. Every Monday after class, Miguel goes to the gym and practices karate for three hours. When he is finished, he goes shopping, then takes the bus home.

2. Process Process means putting events in sequential or step-by-step order. In the following examples, notice how each step-by-step process also describes the passing of time.

a. When making tea, first boil water. Next, put a tea bag into a cup. When the water is boiling, pour the water into the cup. Finally, add milk and sugar as you prefer.

b. Titanic hit an iceberg, broke in two, then sank.

3. Description Description creates pictures of people, places and things using adjectives and adverbs. Description appeals to the senses: smell, sight, taste, hearing and touch.

a. Alexander, the keyboard player in the band, is wearing a black leather jacket, faded jeans and red cowboy boots.

b. The old man lived alone in an old house high on a rugged cliff overlooking a stormy sea.

4. Illustration Illustration means example or supporting illustration, for example: a. There are many places to go for a honeymoon. For example, many newlyweds go to Hawaii.

b. When you visit Manhattan, I suggest you visit Times Square and Central Park.

5. Compare-and-Contrast Compare-and-contrast describes the differences and similarities between two or more objects, people or ideas. Compare-and-contrast also describes differences in opinion, for example: a. Raquel tried the apple pie and decided the cherry pie was sweeter.

b. Ivan believes that all high school students should wear school uniforms; however, Paula believes that students should have the right to choose what they want to wear.

6. Cause-and-Effect Cause-and-effect means action and result. We use cause-and-effect to describe an action and the results, or consequences, of that action, for example: a. Mohammed studied hard and got a high TOEFL score.

b. Global warming is melting the ice at the North Pole.

7. Definition A definition is a detailed description of a person, place, object or idea. The purpose of a definition is to give meaning, for example: a. The dodo was a flightless bird native to New Zealand.

b. TOEFL is an English language proficiency test developed and implemented by Educational Testing Services (ETS) located in Princeton, New Jersey.

8. Classification To classify means to put people, things or ideas into sub groups under a main topic, for example: a. There are three kinds of wine: red, white and ros.

b. TOEFL, TOEIC and IELTS are English language proficiency tests.

TASK: For practice identifying rhetorical strategies, go to page 326.

Check your answers on page 330.

Now go back to Marys argument. Look at the rhetorical strategies she uses to develop her examples. These, in turn, support her opinion and conclusion.

Personal-Opinion Argument: Induction Induction is another way to organize a verbal or written personal-opinion argument. Look at the following examples. Notice how the deductive response begins with an opinion. In contrast, the inductive response develops three examples first, then ends with a conclusion (opinion) based on the examples.

Deduction California was the best trip ever.

I learned how to surf at Malibu. At first, I kept falling off, but I kept trying and soon I could do it. It was great.

And the sights. I visited Hollywood first, Disneyland next, and Catalina Island last. There is so much to see and do. I was exhausted.

Did I tell you about Jack? I met him on Venice Beach. Hes a movie producer. Hes so handsome.

As a matter of fact, were having dinner tonight.

Tomorrow, were flying back to L.A. to get married!

I had a fabulous time.

Induction When I was in California, I learned how to surf at Malibu. At first, I kept falling off, but I kept trying, and soon I could do it. It was great.

And the sights. I visited Hollywood first, Disneyland next, and Catalina Island last. There is so much to see and do. I was exhausted.

Did I tell you about Jack? I met him at Venice Beach. Hes a movie producer. Hes so handsome.

As a matter of fact, were having dinner tonight.

Tomorrow, were flying back to L.A. to get married!

I had a fabulous time in California.

When you start a personal-opinion argument with examplesthen make conclusion based on your examplesyou are using induction as the method of organizing your argument.

Which is better, deduction or induction?

Neither. They are simply two ways to organize a personal-opinion argument when taking the TOEFL test. You will not get a higher score using one or the other.

Developing Your Opinion The most important part of your personal-opinion argument is your opinion.

An opinion is also called a thesis.

Is my opinion also the main topic?

No. Look at the two sentences below.

In sentence A, the test-taker will write (or speak) about California.

California, therefore, is the main topic (also called the main idea or main subject). The test-takers opinion is was the best trip ever. In sentence B, the test-taker will also write (or speak) about California. California is the main topic once again. However, the test-takers opinion is was the worst trip ever. As you can see, the main topic (California) is the same in both sentences; however, each sentence expresses a different opinion about California (best trip v. worst trip).

How do I know if a sentence is an opinion or not?

By asking these four questions.

Mary said, California was the best trip ever. Thats her opinion. But how do we know it is an opinion without guessing? By asking the four questions.

Yes. The sentence California was the best trip ever is grammatically complete. It expresses one idea with a clear verb tense.

Yes. Mary has obviously considered her other vacations and concluded that California was the best compared to the rest. Where were her other vacations? We do not know. They are implied.

Yes. Mary supports her opinion with three examples: 1) learning how to surf at Malibu; 2) going sightseeing, and; 3) meeting Jack.

Marys opinion is not a question. An opinion is never a question.

Based on the four questions, is the sentence California was the best trip ever an opinion? Yes.

What is not an Opinion?

You now know what an opinion is, and how to identify one. So what is not an opinion? Follow these rules.

TASK: For practice identifying opinions, go to page 327. Check your answers on page 330.

Fact-Based Argument: Deduction For TOEFL, you must also construct fact-based verbal and written arguments. A fact-based argument does not state a personal opinion.

Instead, a fact-based argument begins by stating a general truth or fact called a premise. Look at the following example.

Rice is classified according to grain size.

First is long grain rice. An example is basmati. It is long and slender. When cooked, it becomes light and fluffy with the grains separating. Long grain rice is low in starch.

Next is medium grain rice. An example is Calrose.

This type of rice is three times as long as it is wide.

When cooked, the grains stick together. Medium grain rice has more starch than long grain rice.

Finally, there is short grain rice. An example is Arborio. It is kernel-shaped and becomes very moist and tender when cooked. Short grain has the highest starch level.

As illustrated, rice is classified according to grain size.

Notice how this fact-based argument uses deduction as the method organization. However, instead of starting with an opinion, it begins with a premise or general statement.

Rice is classified according to grain size = premise (general statement) Note how the premise is supported by three supporting illustrations. Notice also how each supporting illustration develops and supports the fact that Rice is classified according to grain size.

example #1 First is long grain rice. An example is basmati. It is long and slender. When cooked, it becomes light and fluffy with the grains separating. Long grain rice is low in starch.

example #2 Next is medium grain rice. An example is Calrose. This type of rice is three times as long as it is wide. When cooked, the grains stick together. Medium grain rice has more starch than long grain rice.

example #3 Finally, there is short grain rice. An example is Arborio. It is kernel-shaped and becomes very moist and tender when cooked. Short grain has the highest starch level.

Finally, the writer (or lecturer) makes a conclusion based on the premise supported by the three examples. Note that the conclusion is simply the restated premise.

As illustrated, rice is classified according to grain size = conclusion In a fact-based argument, when you make a conclusion based on the premise and supporting examples, you are using deduction as a method of organization.

By mapping out this fact-based argument, we can see how the writer (or lecturer) is using deduction as a method of organizing his/her argument.

In this example, notice how the conclusion confirms the premise, and takes us right back to the start. The speaking and writing raters will look for this closed or formal structure. Why? Because it means that you are using deduction as a method of organizing a fact-based argument, be it written or verbal.

Fact-Based Argument: Induction You can also organize a verbal or written fact-based argument using induction. Look at the following examples. Notice how the deductive response begins with a premise. In contrast, the inductive response develops three examples first, then ends with a conclusion based on the examples.

Deduction Rice is classified according to grain size.

First is long grain rice. An example is basmati. It is long and slender. When cooked, it becomes light and fluffy with the grains separating. Long grain rice is low in starch.

Next is medium grain rice. An example is Calrose.

This type of rice is three times as long as it is wide.

When cooked, the grains stick together. Medium grain rice has more starch than long grain rice.

Finally, there is short grain rice. An example is Arborio. It is kernel-shaped and becomes very moist and tender when cooked. Short grain has the highest starch level.

As illustrated, rice is classified according to grain size.

Induction An example of a long grain rice is basmati. It is long and slender. When cooked, it becomes light and fluffy with the grains separating. Long grain rice is low in starch.

Next is Calrose, a medium grain rice. This type of rice is three times as long as it is wide. When cooked, the grains stick together. Medium grain rice has more starch than long grain rice.

Finally, there is short grain rice. An example is Arborio. It is kernel-shaped and becomes very moist and tender when cooked. Short grain has the highest starch level.

As illustrated, rice is classified according to grain size.

When you start a fact-based argument with examplesthen make conclusion based on your examplesyou are using induction as the method of organizing your argument.

Coherence = A High Score If you want high speaking and writing scores, your personal-opinion arguments and fact-based arguments must demonstrate coherence.

Coherence means that the individual parts of your argument are working together proficiently to deliver a clear and logical message. An example is Marys personal-opinion argument about California and the fact-based argument about rice. The message in both the deductive and inductive responses is clear: Mary had a fabulous time in California and rice is classified according to grain size. How can you make sure that your verbal and written arguments demonstrate coherence on test day? By using the strategy called argument mapping.

Argument Mapping Argument mapping is a graphics-based strategy designed to help you map out the structure of personal-opinion and fact-based arguments quickly and proficiently. By doing so, both essay types will demonstrate coherence.

An understanding of argument mapping begins with the paragraph map G+TiC. Translated, G+TiC means: General statement + Transition + illustration + Conclusion G+TiC describes the three-parts of a paragraph.

By adding two more body paragraphs (2TiC) and a conclusion (C = restated opinion or premise), G+TiC expands to G+3TiC=C.

G+3TiC=C G+3TiC=C maps out a three-part personal-opinion argument and a three-part fact-based argument that uses deduction as a method of organization.

Depending on the task, the general statement will either be your opinion (personal-opinion argument) or a premise (fact-based argument) supported by illustrations and a conclusion.

Why three supporting illustrations?

G+3TiC=C is based on the five-paragraph essay. The five-paragraph essay consists of an introduction, three body paragraphs and a conclusion. The five-paragraph essay is the foundation essay taught in American high schools. American high school students learn the five- paragraph essay and continue to apply it, and expand upon it, at community college and at university.

Lets map out Marys personal-opinion argument about California using G+3TiC=C. The opinion and conclusions are underlined, the transitions in bold, the illustrations in italics. Note that the general statement (G) is an opinion.

To map out the inductive response, delete Marys opinion. This argument map is 3TiC=C. Notice how the first sentence in body paragraph one introduces the context or situation and how the conclusion (C) is an opinion based on the supporting illustrations (3TiC).

Next, lets map out the fact-based argument about rice using G+3TiC=C.

The premise and conclusions are underlined, the transitions in bold, the illustrations in italics. Note that the general statement (G) is a premise.

To map out the inductive response, start with an example. Notice how the conclusion (C) is an opinion based on the supporting illustrations (3TiC).

Memorize G+3TiC=C. You will use this argument map to develop and deliver responses for all six speaking tasks and for both writing tasks.

Task Order All TOEFL iBT texts teach speaking strategies first, then writing strategies.

This text does things differently. This text starts by teaching you how to write an independent or personal-opinion essay. Why start with the independent essay? Because: 1. you already have a basic understanding of how to write an independent essay; 2. if you can write an independent essay, you will be able to develop and deliver verbal arguments with greater proficiency and confidence.

Mapped out, the task order of this text is as follows.

You cannot change the task order while taking the official TOEFL test. The speaking section always comes before the writing section.

Notes Independent Essay The independent essay will test your ability to write a personal-opinion argument in 30 minutes. Your essay will be based on your opinion supported by personal experience examples. You must type your essay. The task order follows.

Prompt Types For this task, there are a variety of prompt types. The most common are: 1. Agree-Disagree 4. Advantage-Disadvantage 2. Preference 5. Reason 3. Compare-Contrast 6. Quality G+3TiC=C You can answer all independent essay prompt types using the argument map G+3TiC=C. This map describes the structure of a three-part personal-opinion argument that uses deduction as a method of organization. Note that each body paragraph (TiC) has three parts:T = transition; i = supporting illustration (example); C = concluding sentence. Note also that the general statement (G) is an opinion.

Basic Independent Essay To get a high independent essay score*, you must be able to organize your personal-opinion argument quickly and proficiently while writing subjectively. When you write subjectively, you are the subject. In this section, you will learn these basic but essential writing strategies using the argument map G+3TiC=C. Later in this chapter, you will learn how to develop a basic independent essay into an advanced independent essay.

Agree-Disagree Prompts Agree-disagree prompts give you a choice between a pair of opposing positions specific to a topic. You must choose one position and argue in support of it.

Prompt We need zoos. Do you agree or disagree? Why?

Give examples and reasons to develop your opinion.

Avoid double arguments. Choose one side of the argument (single argument) and develop it, for example: Prompt: We need zoos. Do you agree or disagree?

Double Argument: Sometimes I think that we needs zoos, and sometimes I think that we dont need zoos.

Single Argument: Personally, I think that we needs zoos.

Why is a single argument best?

If you try to develop a double argument, you will run out of time.

Because you will run out of time, you will not be able to develop both arguments. This will result in a lack of topic development.

1. Agree-Disagree: Step-by-Step When answering an agree-disagree prompt, write subjectively usingG+3TiC=C and follow these six steps. You have 30 minutes.

Step # 1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt We need zoos. Do you agree or disagree? Why?

Give examples and reasons to support your opinion.

Step #2 Make aG+3TiC=C note map; includetransitions (T).

What about the writing strategy that says, Take five minutes to pre-write, twenty minutes to write, and five minutes to revise?

If that strategy works for you, great. However, many test-takers do not follow this strategy. Instead, they jump right in and start writing. These same test-takers often become frustrated because they have trouble organizing their ideas. However, by using G+3TiC=C, you will know exactly where to start writing, what to write, how to write it and why, without getting lost.

Next, answer the prompt question (Do you agree or disagree?). State your opinion (G = general statement), then restate it in the conclusion (C).

Do I have to repeat I agree in my conclusion?

No. By the time the raters reach your conclusion, your position (whether you agree or disagree) should be clear.

Next, develop supporting illustrations (TiC). Dont worry about spelling or grammar at this point. Just think of ideas. Remember to write subjectively.

By doing so, you will be answering that part of the prompt that says give examples.

Next, answer that part of the prompt that says give reasons. Give reasons by stating a cause-and-effect relationship beside each C (TiC). C is the concluding sentence in each body paragraph. Remember: Each cause-and-effect relationship is a reason why the test-taker thinks zoos are important.

Step #3 Type a first draft. Do not include the note map.

Note: There are mistakes in this draft. Can you identify them?

Personally, I agree. I think that we need zoos.

For example, when I was 12, my teacher took us to the zoo. I have never seen wild animals before. I just read about them on books or on the TV. But seeing them in real life was amazing, especially the lion. On the Tv, they look small, but seeing them so close they are really big. By going to the zoo, I definitely saw a new hole in the light.

Now I have a family and we went to the zoo at summer. My wife makes a picnick and we spend all days there. My kids love taking pictures and learning all about the animals, specially the gorillas. This is good for my children be outside. Best of all, they can leave the internet and the TV at home.

Also, zoos look after extinct animals like pandas. I saw two in the Washington DC zoo. Zoo take care of animals like pandas.

For those reasons, I think that we need zoos.

You now have a first draft. It looks coherent. But how do you know it is coherent without guessing? Moreover, how can you revise your first draft when practicing and on test day to maximize scoring? By checking your first draft for coherence using OPDUL=C. Say it as it sounds: Op-dull-see.

OPDUL=C OPDUL=C is an argument analyzer. Using OPDUL=C, you can quickly and systematically check your essays coherence level using proficiency as a measure. Proficiency means your ability to demonstrate skill and knowledge specific to Organization, Progression, Development, Unity and Language Use. For example, if your independent essay demonstrates proficiency in all areas of OPDUL, then your essay (argument) will demonstrate Coherence.

This will result in a higher score.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

You are the writer. Check the first draft of the zoo essay (Step #3) for Coherence using the OPDUL=C proficiency checklist. Start with Organization and ask yourself yes-no questions.

Does my essay demonstrate organization?

Im using deduction as a method of organization. This demonstrates organization. Yes No _ Does my essay demonstrate progression?

Because Im using deduction, the ideas progress from general to specific. This demonstrates progression. Yes No _ a. Does my introduction demonstrate development.

I say, I think that we need zoos. This is my opinion. It is arguable, supportable, a complete sentence and not a question. This demonstrates introduction development. However, to get a higher score, I need to develop my introduction with a hook (see the next page for more about hooks). Yes _ No X b. Do my body paragraphs demonstrate development?

Body paragraphs # 1 and #2 each develop an example that supports my opinion and conclusion. This demonstrates body paragraph development. However, body paragraph #3 lacks development. To get a higher score, I need to develop body paragraph #3. Yes _ No X c. Does my conclusion demonstrate development?

I restate my opinion in my conclusion. This demonstrates conclusion development. However, to demonstrate greater proficiency, I need to develop my conclusion with a conclusion strategy (see the next page for more about conclusion strategies). Yes _ No X a. Does my essay demonstrate topical unity?

I focus on the topic of zoos with no topic digressions. This demonstrates topical unity. Yes No _ Note: Topical unity means you focus on one topic from start to finish. If you suddenly introduce a new and unrelated topic, you are changing topics. For example, you are writing about apples, apples, apples when you suddenly change to oranges. This clear change in topic direction is called a topic digression. This will result in a lack of topical unity (OPDUL=C) and a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C).

b. Does my essay demonstrate grammatical unity?

The transitions are all correct. This demonstrates grammatical unity. Yes No _ Does my essay demonstrate proficient language use?

I need to be more proficient with word choice, idiom usage and grammar usage, especially in body paragraph #3. Combined, this will demonstrate greater language use proficiency. Yes _ No X Does my essay (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Because of proficient Organization, Progression and Unity, my first draft demonstrates Coherence. Even though there are problems with Development and Language Use, my argument is still clear: I think that we need zoos. This demonstrates Coherence. Yes No _ According to the Independent Essay Rating Guide (page 312), this first draft will score in the 2.5-3.5 range.

If you (the writer) want a higher score, you must revise those parts of OPDUL=C that received an X. By doing so, you will demonstrate greater proficiency. The Xs are your revision checklist.

Revision Checklist: What do I need to revise?

1. I need to start my essay with a hook. The purpose of a hook is to hook the readers attention in the first sentence. A hook will demonstrate greater introduction development (OPDUL=C).

Note: You will learn hooks and other advanced strategies later on in this chapter.

2. I need to end my essay with a conclusion strategy. This will demonstrate greater conclusion development (OPDUL=C).

Note: You will learn advanced conclusion strategies later on in this chapter.

3. I need to correct any word choice, grammar and idiom issues. This will demonstrate more proficient language use (OPDUL=C).

Be careful about using idioms. Do not use an idiom if you are not 100% sure of its meaning and in which context it is used. An idiom used incorrectly (out of context) will stick out like a sore thumb, for example: By going to the zoo, I definitely saw a new hole in the light.

should be By going to the zoo, I definitely saw things in a whole new light.

4. I need to develop body paragraph #3. This will demonstrate greater topic development (OPDUL=C).

Lack of topic development (OPDUL=C), especially in the body paragraphs, is a big reason why independent essays score low.

If you want a high independent essay score, your body paragraphs must be well developed. Well developed means you have a clear supporting illustration (TiC) in each body paragraph and you show a cause-and-effect relationship (reason) in your concluding sentence (TiC).

Why is body paragraph development so important?

Body paragraph development is important because developing examples is the hardest part of the independent essay. Why is it the hardest part?

Because body paragraph development will test your automaticity.

Automaticity means your ability to develop ideas quickly and proficiently under a time pressure. Well-developed body paragraphs will demonstrate automaticity, proficiency and coherence. That is what the raters will look for.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Personally, I agree. I think that we need zoos.

For example, when I was 12, my teacher took us to the zoo in Berlin. I had never seen wild animals before. I had just read about them in books and seen them on the TV. But seeing them in real life was amazing, especially the lions. On TV, they looked so small, but seeing them live they were really big. By going to the zoo, I definitely saw things in a whole new light.

Now I have a family and we always go to the zoo every summer. My wife makes a picnic and we spend all day there. My kids love taking pictures and learning all about the animals, especially the gorillas.

Being outside is good for my children. Best of all, they can leave the internet and the TV at home.

Also, zoos look after endangered animals like pandas.

I saw two in the Washington DC zoo last year and they had a baby. If there were no zoos, the pandas would disappear because we are taking their land away. However, in a zoo the pandas are safe. It is not perfect, but without zoos there might not be any pandas left.

For those reasons, I think that we need zoos.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

After you have revised your essay, submit it.

Make sure you have made all the necessary revisions before you submit your essay. Once you submit it, you cannot get it back.

Mapped out, you can see how G+3TiC=C gives the writing raters what they are trained to look for: an independent essay that demonstrates OPDUL=C.

Note: Transitions (T) are in bold, supporting illustrations (i) in italics, the opinion (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

TASK: Rate the zoo essay above using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your score to the score on page 333.

What if I can only think of two body paragraphs(G+2TiC=C)?

If you can write an independent essay that demonstrates OPDUL=C using G+2TiC=C, great.

If you write your independent essay using G+2TiC=C, make sure both body paragraphs are well developed. A lack of body paragraph development (OPDUL=C) will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

Rhetorical Strategies Rhetorical strategies demonstrate topic development (OPDUL=C) and language use (OPDUL=C). These, in turn, demonstrate coherence (OPDUL=C). The zoo essay demonstrates a variety of rhetorical strategies, including: How many words do I have to write? Is there some rule?

ETS has no official word-length rule. There is only this guideline from ETS: [A]n effective [independent] essay will usually contain a minimum of three hundred words; however, test-takers may write more if they wish.

How many words is the zoo essay?

213.

The Word Counter When you write your independent essay, you will see a word counter on your computer screen. Ignore it. You are not counting words. You are writing an independent essay that demonstrates OPDUL=C, not aiming for a minimum of three hundred words.

A long essay does not always mean a coherent (effective) argument.

On the contrary, a long essay often means a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C). Some test-takers simply type and type, thinking more is better. Wrong. Your job is to write an independent essay that proficiently demonstrates OPDUL=C.

2. Agree-Disagree: Step-by-Step Lets map out another agree-disagree response. Remember to use G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion Prompt Television is a good influence on children. Do you agree or disagree? Why? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (3TiC).

Give reasons by stating a cause - and- effect relationship beside each C (TiC). Each cause-and-effect relationship is a reason why TV is a bad Influence on kids.

Step #3 Type a first draft. Do not include the note map.

Note: There are mistakes in this draft. Can you identify them?

Personally, I with the statement. I believe that TV is a bad influence on our children.

For example, my neighbor boy he is started kicking and punching his little sister. I told him to stop, but he didnt. He says he was a Power Ranger. He even kicked me. I told his mom and she said Power Rangers has been his favorite TV shows, but she never stopped him from kicking people.

On the other hand is my eight-year brother. He love the TV. When he watch, he eat a lot of junk food like chips and choclates. He also drinks Coca Colas alot.

All that stuff has so much sugar. My brother he used to be skinny but because he never exercise is definitely get fat and so young.

Finally is Britney little girl I babysats. When I drive her around, like going shopping in the car she always want to watch the DVD. I say lets talk but she scream and wants the DVD. Then she gets home and watch even more the TV. This is her addiction. Her mother says no but this little girl all she do is scream for TV more.

For those reason, I believe that the TV is a bad influence on our children.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Does my essay demonstrate organization?

I use deduction as a method of organization. This demonstrates organization. Yes No _ Does my essay demonstrate progression?

Because I am using deduction, the ideas progress from general to specific. This demonstrates progression. Yes No _ a. Does my introduction demonstrate development?

I say, I believe that TV is a bad influence on our children. This is my opinion. It is arguable, supportable, a complete sentence and not a question. This demonstrates introduction development for a basic response. Yes No _ b. Do my body paragraphs demonstrate development?

Each body paragraph develops a specific personal example that supports and develops my opinion and conclusion. However, each body paragraph does not have a concluding sentence (TiC) because I do not state a reason using cause-and-effect. This demonstrates a lack of body paragraph development. Yes _ No X c. Does my conclusion demonstrate development?

I restate my opinion in the conclusion. This demonstrates conclusion development for a basic response. Yes No _ a. Does my essay demonstrate topical unity?

I focus on the topic of television being a bad influence on children with no topical digressions. This demonstrates topical unity. Yes No _ b. Does my essay demonstrate grammatical unity?

The transitions are correct. This demonstrates grammatical unity. Yes No _ Does my essay demonstrate proficient language use?

I use only basic words and sentences, and I dont use any idioms. Also, there are many basic errors in word choice and verb tense. This demonstrates a lack of proficient language use. Yes _ No X Does my essay (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Because of proficient Organization, Progression and Unity, my first draft is Coherent. Even though there are problems with Development and Language Use, my argument is still clear: Television is a bad influence on our children. Yes No _ According to the Independent Essay Rating Guide (page 312), this first draft will only score in the 2.5-3.5 range. If you (the writer) want a higher score, you must revise those parts of OPDUL=C that received an X. By doing so, your essay will demonstrate greater proficiency and coherence and receive a higher score.

Revision Checklist: What do I need to revise?

1. Each body paragraph needs a concluding sentence (TiC). In each concluding sentence, I need to state a reason using a cause-and-effect relationship. This will demonstrate greater topic development (OPDUL=C).

2. Correct the spelling and grammar errors, and use idioms and more sentence variety. This will demonstrate more proficient language use (OPDUL=C).

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

I disagree with the statement. Personally, I believe that TV is a bad influence on our children.

For example, my neighbors boy started kicking and punching his little sister. I told him to stop, but he didnt. He said he was a Power Ranger like on TV. He even kicked me. I told his mom and she said Power Rangers is his favorite TV show, but she never stopped him from kicking people. She thought it was funny. Not me. This little boy was a nice kid, but watching Power Rangers has definitely taught him things he should not do.

Another example is my little brother. He is eight and loves to watch TV. When he watches TV, he eats a lot of junk food like chips and chocolate and Coca Cola.

That stuff has so much sugar. My brother used to be skinny but now he is definitely a couch potato. My parents tell him to exercise but he never does. All he does is eat junk food and watch TV. Watching TV this way is definitely not good for his health because now he is diabetic.

Finally, there is Britney, the little girl I babysit. When I drive her around, like when going shopping, she always wants to watch DVDs. I say lets talk but she screams and just wants to watch a DVD. Then at home she watches more TV. Her mother says no, but all Britney does is scream for the TV. Its like an addiction. Right now, her parents cannot her control her any more. This is not good.

For those reasons, I believe that TV is a bad influence on our children.

Words: 278 Step #6 Submit your essay.

After you have revised your essay, submit it.

Mapped out, you can see how G+3TiC=C gives the writing raters what they are trained to look for: a coherent independent essay that demonstrates OPDUL=C. Note: Transitions (T) are in bold, supporting illustrations (i) in italics, the opinion (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

TASK: Rate the TV essay above using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on Page 312. Compare your score to the score on page 333. Independent Essay 37.

Preference Prompts Preference prompts give you a choice between a pair of opposing positions specific to a topic. You must choose one position and argue in support of it, for example: Prompt Do you prefer to use a laptop computer or a desktop computer? Why? State your position using examples and reasons.

Avoid double arguments. Choose one side of the argument and develop it, for example: Prompt: Do you prefer to use a laptop or a desktop computer?

Double Argument: Sometimes I prefer a laptop, and sometimes I prefer a desktop.

Single Argument: Personally, I prefer a laptop.

If you try to develop a double argument, you will run out of time and not be able to develop both arguments. This will result in a lack of topic development (OPDUL=C) and alack of coherence (OPDUL=C).

Preference: Step-by-Step When answering a preference prompt, write subjectively using G+3TiC=C and follow the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt Do you prefer to use a laptop computer or a desktop computer? Why? State your position using examples and reasons.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (3TiC).

Step #3 Type a first draft. Do not include the note map.

Note: There are mistakes in this draft. Can you identify them?

I definitely prefer laptop computers to a desktops.

For example, am student and need a laptop for my classes. If I dont have laptop I will take notes by my pen and that is really slow and my handwriteing is really bad. But with my laptop my notes is clear. This saves my time. I could not do this with a desktop. Its too big and not light to carry. As you can see, a laptop is the best for notes taking in class.

In addition, I can take my laptops everywhere to study. This is good because sometime my roommate, he has his loud musik. If he plays loud musik, I cannot do the homework so I go the library or to a Starbuck.

There I connect to the internet and do my homework.

Because my laptop is small, I can do these things and not hear the loud music.

Moreover, a few year ago, a laptops were very expensive but now you can get a really fast Sony for cheaper than a desktop. This is good because I can save my money and I need this money for other stuff because Im a student.

In the final analysis, I definitely prefer a laptop.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Note: This test-taker has checked his first draft for coherence using OPDUL=C and has moved on to step #5.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Note: This test-taker has revised his essay according to his revision checklist and moved on to step #6.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 333.

Personally, I prefer a laptop to a desktop.

For example, Im a university student and I need a laptop for my classes. If I didnt have a laptop, Id have to take notes by hand, and that would be really slow. Also, my handwriting is really bad, but with my laptop I can quickly take notes. This saves me a lot of time. I couldnt take notes with a desktop. It is too big and not made for carrying. As you can see, a laptop is definitely best for note taking in class.

In addition, I can take my laptop anywhere to study.

This is good because sometimes my roommate plays really loud music. When he plays his music, I cant do any homework so I go the library or to Starbucks.

There I can connect to the internet and do my homework. Because my laptop is small and portable, I can do these things. Best of all, I dont have to listen to my roommates music.

Moreover, a few years ago laptops were very expensive but now you can get a really fast laptop with lots of memory, like my Sony, for cheaper than a desktop. This is good because I can save money. With this money, I can buy other school things like books.

In the final analysis, I definitely prefer a laptop.

Words: 225 Compare-and-Contrast Prompts Compare-and-contrast prompts ask you to argue the opposite sides of a topic, for example: Prompt What do you think a friend might like and not like about the place you call home? Why?

Develop your position using examples and reasons.

There are many things my friend might like and dislike about my hometown. I could write forever! What should I do?

Keep it simple. Change G+3TiC=C to G+2TiC=C. Develop one positive example in body paragraph one and one negative example in body paragraph two. By doing so, you will compare and contrast the positive and the negative sides of the topic.

1. Compare-and-Contrast: Step-by-Step When answering a compare-and-contrast prompt, use G+2TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt What do you think a friend might like and not like about the place you call home? Why?

Develop your position using examples and reasons.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (2TiC).

Note the transition of contrast connecting the body paragraphs.

Step #3 Type a first draft. Do not include the note map.

There are some things my friend will like and wont like about the place I call my home, New Delhi in India.

For example, the delicious food. There are many kinds of food. Also, there are a lot of restaurants and the prices are very reasonable for tourists. My friend will like this.

However, New Delhi is very hot and very humid. My friend will not like this.

For those reasons, there are some things my friend will like and wont like about the place I call my home, New Delhi in India.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Note: This test-taker has checked his first draft for coherence using OPDUL=C and has moved on to step #5.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Note: This test-taker has revised his essay according to his revision checklist and moved on to step #6.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

According to OPDUL=C, what is the main problem with the following essay?

There are some things my friend will like and wont like about the place I call my home, New Delhi in India.

For example, the delicious food. There are many kinds of food. Also, there are a lot of restaurants and the prices are very reasonable for tourists. My friend will like this.

However, New Delhi is very hot and very humid. My friend will not like this.

For those reasons, there are some things my friend will like and wont like about the place I call my home, New Delhi in India.

Words: 93 The main problem with this essay is that it lacks body paragraph development. This essay looks like Map A. It should look like Map B. Map B is an independent essay that demonstrates well-developed body paragraphs.

Well developed means you have a clear supporting illustration (TiC) in each body paragraph, and you show a reason based on a cause-and-effect relationship in your concluding sentence (TiC).

Fixing a Lack of Body Paragraph Development You can fix a lack of body paragraph development two ways.

1) For each body paragraph, use one specific personal experience example. Then, using the rhetorical strategy of narration, develop the example subjectively, like you are telling a personal story to a friend. Use description and illustration for names, places, dates, prices, etc. The raters will look for these details. More details = greater body paragraph development (OPDUL=C) = greater coherence (OPDUL=C) = a higher score.

2) From the illustration in each body paragraph, state a conclusion based on a cause-and-effect relationship. This will be your reason. State this reason in the concluding sentence (TiC).

Go back to the New Delhi essay. Look at body paragraph one.

For example, the delicious food. There are many kinds of food. Also, there are a lot of restaurants and the prices are very reasonable for tourists. My friend will like this.

Body paragraph one lacks development because: 1) the writer does not develop a personal experience example writing subjectively, and; 2) the writer does not conclude the paragraph with a reason based on a cause-and-effect relationship.

Look at the same paragraph revised. Note the details and the cause- and - effect relationship in the concluding sentence giving the reason why the friend will like New Delhi.

For example, the food is very delicious in New Delhi.

When I am hungry, I go to Sheshrajs, the best restaurant in New Delhi. It is a family restaurant and they have been doing a good business for many years.

The prices are very reasonable and you get a lot of food. The lamb curry is excellent as is the aloo gobi.

For a good meal, my friend can spend maybe one American dollar. Eating at this excellent restaurant will give my friend a real New Delhi experience.

Next, look at body paragraph two. It too demonstrates a lack of development.

However, New Delhi is very hot and very humid. My friend will not like this.

Look at paragraph two revised. Note the reason in the concluding sentence (TiC).

However, the weather in the summer months of July and August can be extreme. Temperatures can reach 120 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. Last summer, I remember the temperature reached 123 degrees. If my friend is not careful, he can get too much sun and feel very weak and ill. Also, it rains very much and is very humid. As you can see, visiting New Delhi in summer might not be a good time for my friend. This might give him some difficulty and test his patience.

Next, look at the revised essay. Notice that the test-taker is using G+2TiC=C.

There are some things my friend will like and wont like about the place I call my home, New Delhi in India.

For example, the food is very delicious in New Delhi.

When I am hungry, I go to Sheshrajs, the best restaurant in New Delhi. It is a family restaurant and they have been doing a good business for many years.

The prices are very reasonable and you get a lot of food. The lamb curry is excellent as is the aloo gobi.

For a good meal, my friend can spend maybe one American dollar. Eating at this excellent restaurant will give my friend a real New Delhi experience.

However, the weather in the summer months of July and August can be extreme. Temperatures can reach 100 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. Last summer, I remember the temperature reached 123 degrees. If my friend is not careful, he can get too much sun and feel very weak and ill. Also, it rains very much and is very humid. As you can see, visiting New Delhi in summer might not be a good time for my friend. This might give him some difficulty and test his patience.

In conclusion, there are some things my friend will like and wont like about the place I call my home, New Delhi, India.

Words: 219 TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 333.

2. Compare-and-Contrast: Step-by-Step Lets map out another compare-and-contrast response. Remember to use G+2TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt Eating out has both positive and negative aspects. What are they? Why? Develop your argument using examples and reasons.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (2TiC).

Note the transition of contrast connecting the body paragraphs.

Step #3 Type a first draft.

Personally, I think eating out has good and bad aspects.

For example, people love to go to restaurants. There are many restaurants in my town such as pizza, Chinese and Thai restaurants. This is good for people because they can go and have different food every night.

However, eating out is very expensive. Who has money these days? The economy is not so good, so people stay home because restaurants are expensive.

In conclusion, eating out has good and bad points.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Note: This test-taker has checked her first draft for coherence using OPDUL=C and has moved on to step #5.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Note: This test-taker has revised her essay according to her revision checklist and moved on to step #6.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

What is the problem with the essay below?

Personally, I think eating out has both good and bad points people should think about.

For example, people really love to go to restaurants.

There are many restaurants in my hometown, such as pizza, Chinese and Thai restaurants. This is very good for people, especially when they are very busy at work. They can go to have a different meal every night and not worry about dishes.

However, to eat out can be very expensive. Who has money these days to go to restaurants? The economy is not so good, so people stay home and cook. This is what people do.

In conclusion, eating out has many good and bad points for people to consider.

Words: 115 The problem with this essay is that the test-taker is not writing subjectively. Instead, she is writing objectively. When you write objectively, you are writing about other people and their experiences. In the above essay, who are these people who love to go to restaurants?

We dont know. This demonstrates a lack of topic development (OPDUL=C) and coherence (OPDUL=C).

Write subjectively. Write about yourself. Also, be specific. Include as many details as possible. Details = greater topic development = a higher score. Next, look at the same essay rewritten. Notice how the test-taker is now writing subjectively. The test-taker is now the main subject.

Personally, I think eating out has both good and bad points people should think about.

For example, I love to eat out. My favorite is Thai.

There is a great Thai restaurant near my apartment. It is called The Bangkok. The service there is very fast and the food is always excellent, especially the pad Thai and the curry shrimp. I can eat a good meal at The Bangkok for about twenty dollars. This is good for me because I am single and sometimes I work late, so I just go to this restaurant and eat a lot. Best of all, I dont have to wash the dishes, which I really hate to do.

However, to eat out can be very expensive. If I eat at The Bangkok every night for a week, I can spend $140 or more. If I drink alcohol, like a beer, it is even more expensive. For me, $140 is a lot of money. And that is eating at a cheap restaurant. If I go to a more expensive restaurant, like a sushi restaurant, I can spend a lot of money fast. This is something I must watch. Eating out is fun and convenient, but if I am not careful it can be very expensive.

In conclusion, eating out has good and bad points.

Words: 219 TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 334.

Advantage-Disadvantage Prompts Advantage-disadvantage prompts, like compare-contrast prompts, ask you to argue by comparing and contrasting the opposing sides of a topic, for example: Prompt What are the advantages and disadvantages of owning a car? State your opinion using illustrations and reasons.

There are many advantages and disadvantages to owning a car. I could write forever! What should I do?

Keep it simple. Change G+3TiC=C to G+2TiC=C. Develop one advantage in body paragraph one and one disadvantage in body paragraph two.

Advantage-Disadvantage: Step-by-Step When answering an advantage-disadvantage prompt, use G+2TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt What are the advantages and disadvantages of owning a car? State your opinion using examples and reasons.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (2TiC).

Note the transition of contrast connecting the body paragraphs.

Step #3 Type a first draft. Do not include the note map.

Note: There are mistakes in this draft. Can you identify them?

Personally, I think there is the advantages and disadvantages to be own the car.

For example, I have a Honda care. Every time I drives to work. Before I have to take the bus. The bus it take a long time. Sometimes the bus misses me and I am late for work. Then I saved my money and bought a Honda care. Now I am always on time and my boss he no get angry no more for being so late owning a Honda care is big advantage.

Also, owning a car can be so much expensive I drive to work every time so I use a lots of the gasoline.

Which costs a lot of money these days. In one week I spend more than $100 on the gas. Insurance and repairs also expensive tire too. That means I have to spend less dollars on other things like the food and the cloths this is a big disadvantage two so I am to think about buying the motorcycle Suzuki 750cc. Wow, is so fast. You cant belief.

To sum, better to be owning a motorcyle.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Note: This test-taker has checked his first draft for coherence using OPDUL=C and has moved on to step #5.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Note: This test-taker has revised his essay according to his revision checklist and moved on to step #6.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 334.

Note: There are mistakes in this essay. Can you identify them?

Personally, I think there is the advantages and disadvantages to be own the car.

For example, I have a Honda care. Every time I drives to work. Before I have to take the bus. The bus takes a long time. Sometimes the bus misses me and I am late for work. Then I saved my money and bought a Honda care. Now I am always on time and my boss he no get angry no more for being so late so owning a Honda car is big advantage so you should buy a Honda car to.

Also owning a car can be so much expensive I drive to work every time so I use a lots of the gasoline so I am to think about buying the motorcycle Suzuki 750cc, wow, is so fast. You cant belief. Another one is the Harley Davision but is so expensive to. But so nice on weekends I can drive in the country and leave city. This is what I want to do with friends they have motorcyle and ride all the times.

To sum, better to be owning a motorcyle.

Words: 187 Advantage: Step-by-Step Advantage prompts ask you to argue the positive side of a topic. The positive side states the advantages, for example: Prompt What are the advantages of telecommuting? State your argument using examples and reasons.

When answering an advantage prompt, use G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (3TiC).

Step #3 Type a first draft. Do not include the note map.

Note: There are mistakes in this draft. Can you identify them?

From my experience, I can definately say that their are many advantages to working from your home.

For example, at work I have a small cubicle. Its really noisy because of people always talking and using the copi machines. Also, people are always stopping and saying hello to me. This is not good because it waists a lot of time. It also makes it hard for me to finish my work. But at home, nobody bothers me and I finish my work without interruption. This is a big advantage of telecomuting.

Also, when I do go to work, I must get early and drive. It takes an hour. Offen the traffic is bad. When there is an accident, I get to work late. That means I have to stay late to finish my assignments. Plus gas is expensive, especially since I have an SUV. But if I work at home, I dont have to worry about traffic and I can save money on gas. Those are definately advantages.

For those reasons, I believe there are advantages to working from home.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Note: This test-taker has checked her first draft for coherence using OPDUL=C and has moved on to step #5.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Note: This test-taker has revised her essay according to her revision checklist and moved on to step #6.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 335.

From my experience, I can definitely say that there are many advantages to working from your home.

For example, at work I have a small cubicle in a big office. Its really noisy because people are always talking and using the copy machines. Also, people are always stopping and saying hello to me. This is not good because it wastes a lot of time. It also makes it hard for me to finish my work. But at home, nobody bothers me and I finish my work without interruption.

This is a big advantage of telecommuting.

Also, when I do go to work, I must get up early and drive. It takes an hour. Often the traffic is bad. When there is an accident, I get to work late. That means I have to stay late to finish my assignments. Plus gas is expensive, especially since I have an SUV. But if I work at home, I dont have to worry about traffic, and I can save money on gas. Those are definitely advantages.

Finally, my children are very small, only seven and eight. Every morning I drop them off at day care. But when I work at home, I can look after them. This saves me money and time. Also, I can see my children more often, and this makes us all very happy. This is the best advantage of telecommuting, killing two birds with one stone.

For those reasons, I believe there are advantages to working from home.

Words: 249 Disadvantage: Step-by-Step Disadvantage prompts ask you to argue the negative side of a topic. The negative side states the disadvantages. When answering a disadvantage prompt, use G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt What are the disadvantages of getting a university degree online? Develop your argument using illustrations and reasons.

Note: This test-taker has completed steps #2 to #5.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 335.

It goes without saying that there are disadvantages to getting a university degree on the internet.

For example, I enrolled in an online university course last year. I wanted an MBA. I thought I would have lots of time to fit it into my schedule, especially on the weekends. But I soon learned it was not that easy. On the weekends, I did not want to study. I just wanted to rest and be with my family all the time. That is what I did. As a result, I did not finish the course.

Another problem is the reputation of the school. My friend was about to finish an online course. He had been studying for two years when the school just disappeared and took his money.

What else? Oh, yeah. If you like talking to professors, go to a regular university. Online, you only talk to professors by email and not all the time. Some people prefer this, but not me.

For those reasons, you can see that getting a university degree on the internet has many disadvantages.

Words: 179 Reason Prompts Reason prompts are single-question prompts. The question in the prompt will begin with either Who, Where, When, Why, How, or If.

Reasons come from cause-and-effect relationships, for example: Man: Why should I study for the TOEFL test?

Woman: You should study (cause) because you will get a higher score (effect).

Man: A higher score? Thats a good reason to study for TOEFL.

1. Reason: Step-by-Step When answering a reason prompt, use G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt Which technology in the past fifty years has changed your life the most? Why? Develop your position using examples and reasons.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (3TiC).

Step #3 Type a first draft.

Note: There are mistakes in this draft. Can you identify them?

Personally, I think internet change my world most.

First, I from China. I now working in US. That mean my family and friend back in Beijing is very far away.

Yet by using internet, I can talk to them as much as I want using email and IM. Best is Skype. Skype I can see their faces and they see mind. Before internet, people have to send letter. That take so long. But internet change all that. Internet make communication fast and easy for me and my family. It like magic.

Also, internet good for researching. I am researching laser for testing weather. I develop a new way to measure nitrogen in cloud. To research my idea, I always use internet. It is good for finding article and research paper that can help me with my research paper. If I did not have internet, I have to go to library.

That take a lot of time and much travel and cost too much. But with internet, all I do is google and I get information fast and easy. This is really a big change for research.

Third is people I meet. When I have question about my work, I email other scientist I know in the world.

With email we can talk about our work and share idea.

Before the internet, scientist must travel or talk by phone. Both very expensive. Now instead we talk every day by email or IM for a cheap price.

For the aforementioned reason, internet change my life most.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Note: This test-taker has checked his first draft for coherence using OPDUL=C and has moved on to step #5.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Note: This test-taker has revised his essay according to his revision checklist and moved on to step #6.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 336.

Personally, I believe that the internet has changed my life the most.

First, I am from China. I am now working in the US.

That means my family and friends back in Beijing are very far away. Yet by using internet, I can talk to them as much as I want using email and IM. The best way is Skype. With Skype, I can see my parents faces and they can see mine. Before the internet, people had to send letters. That took so long. But the internet has changed all that. The internet makes communication fast and easy for me and my family. Its like magic.

Also, the internet is good for researching. Right now, Im researching lasers for testing weather. Im developing a new way to measure nitrogen in clouds.

To research my idea, I always use the internet. Its good for finding articles and papers that can help me with my research. If I didnt have the internet, I would have to go to the library. That would take a lot of time and much travel, and cost a lot. But with the internet, all I have to do is google and I can get the information fast and easy. This is really a big change for research scientists like myself.

Third is the people I can meet. When I have question about my work, I can email other scientists I know around the world. With email, we can chat about our work and share ideas. Before the internet, scientists had to travel or talk by phone. Both were very expensive. Now we can talk every day by email or by IM for a low cost.

For the aforementioned reasons, the internet has changed my life the most.

Words: 291 2. Reason: Step-by-Step Lets map out another reason prompt using G+3TiC=TO and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt Why do people travel? Use examples and reasons to support your argument.

Note: This test-taker has completed steps #2 to #5.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 336.

Note: There are mistakes in this essay. Can you identify them?

Personally, I think people travel because they like to learn new stuff.

For example, I went to Manhattan last year. I visited many famous places like Radio City Hall. The most place was the Ground Zero. Ground Zero has been the World Trade Center was. Now it is nothing but big whole. On TV it no look so big. But seeing it for real, wow! So big. Amazing!

Also, I love to shopping. When I travel, I always go to big department stores because they always have sell.

When I went to Manhattan I went to Macy because they was having this big sell. I bought so many things, such a handbag and stuffs. I saved lots of money.

Definately, you can save money going to sells.

And you can meets lots of friends when you travels.

For though reason, I think traveling is definitely a learned experience.

Words: 148 3. Reason: Step-by-Step Lets map out another reason prompt using G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt If could change the world, what would you do?

Give illustrations and reasons to support your argument.

Note: This test-taker has completed steps #2 to #5.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 306, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 308. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 337.

Note: There are mistakes in this essay. Can you identify them?

If I can, I will stop all the pollutes in world this day.

First, I no more the pollute from cars. This pollute is CO2. This stop green gazes. Next, I will no more the plastic bottle. These day everywhere you look is water bottle. This is a big problem. You can find this bottle everywhere. Finally, noisey pollution. I live in Roma.

Is so noisey pollute I can no sleep. Now I work and live in Manhattan and is still same noisey pollution.

For that reasons, I stop the pollutes.

Words: 91 4. Reason: Step-by-Step Lets map out another reason prompt using G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt How has technology made our lives better?

Develop your argument using examples and reasons.

Step # 2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (3TiC).

Step #3 Type a first draft. Do not include the note map.

Note: This test-taker is using induction as a method of organizing her argument.

Note: There are mistakes in the draft on the next page. Can you identify them?

My sister had brest cancer ten year ago. She was able to have it treated with chemotherapy. Chemo are very powerful cancer drugs. My sister is alive because of this drugs. This medical technology definately made my sisters life better.

At high school never had computers. We had just only old fashioned typewriters. When I was tying, I made lots of mistake, so always I had to go back and start over again. But now with computers, typing is fast and so easy. If I make a mistake, all I to do is back space or cut and delete. Using a computer has made my live better, especially now writing this TOEFL esay.

Finally, I can say that the car has made a big chance in my life. Before I had to always go everywhere by the bus. I hated it. It took up so much of my time. Also when I went to work, I have to get up early and sometimes the bus was late an never came. The bus was a nightmare for me. But then I got a car and no longer did I need the bus.

Owning a car has definately made my life better.

For the aforementioned, you can see how technology has definately changed my life and many others for the better.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Note: This test-taker has checked her first draft for coherence using OPDUL=C and has moved on to step #5.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Note: This test-taker has revised her essay according to her revision checklist and moved on to step #6.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Check the essay on the next page for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312.

Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 337.

When my sister was told she had breast cancer, she was able to have it treated with special drugs called chemotherapy. Chemo is very powerful medicine.

My sister had to take it by IV every day for six weeks.

It made her really sick but without chemo, my sister might not be here today. She had cancer ten years ago and today she is happy with a good job and a big family. As you can see, medical technology such as chemotherapy has made my sisters life better.

Another example is when I was in high school. When I was learning how to type, we never had computers.

We just had old fashioned typewriters. They were really hard to use because the keys were so heavy.

Also, when I was typing, I made lots of mistake, so I had to go back and start again. But now with computers, typing is fast and easy. If I make a mistake, I can back space or cut and delete. Using a computer has definitely made my life better, especially now writing this TOEFL essay.

Finally, I can say that the car has really made a big difference in my life. Before I bought a car, I commuted by bus. I hated it. It took up so much time.

Also, when I went to work, I had to get up early and sometimes the bus was late or never came. What a hassle! In a nutshell, the bus was a nightmare. But then I got a car, and suddenly the bus was history.

Now I can go anywhere, anytime. I cant live without my car. Owning one has really made my life better.

For the aforementioned reasons, you can see how technology has made a positive impact on my life and other lives as well.

Words: 302 Quality Prompts Quality prompts ask you to argue in support of the qualities of a person, place or thing. Qualities means positive aspects or characteristics, for example: Prompt What are the qualities of a good university?

Develop your position using illustrations and reasons.

Quality: Step-by-Step When answering a quality prompt, use G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt What are the qualities of a good university?

Develop your position using illustrations and reasons.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (3TiC).

Step #3 Type a first draft. Do not include the note map.

Note: There are mistakes in this draft. Can you identify them?

A good university should have many qualitys.

For example, I study ESL at the Shelton University.

The teachers have lots of experience. This is good because they explain things very well and I can learn fast.

Moreover, at Shelton University there is lots of great coarses. I can take grammar or writing coarses. There is a coarse for every level. So far the best coarse for me was the English for Business. In that class Professor Morrison taught me how to write a resume and a cover letter. Because of this, I now have a part time job as a translator.

In addition, Shelton University is a good location. Its right at downtown and very close to the subway estation. It takes me five minutes from estation to school. This is very convenient. Best of all, I dont have to drive my car and find a place to park, which is expensive too.

For those reasons, I believe that Sheldon University has many good qualities.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Note: This test-taker has checked his first draft for coherence using OPDUL=C and has moved on to step #5.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Note: This test-taker has revised his essay according to his revision checklist and moved on to step #6.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Check this essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310, then rate it using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. Compare your proficiency checklist and your rating to those on page 338.

Personally, I contend that a good university should have many qualities.

For example, I study ESL at Shelton University. The teachers there have lots of teaching experience. Also, many of them taught English in foreign countries.

This is good because the teachers at Shelton University can understand my situation in America and teach me words and idioms I can use when shopping or at the bank, like credit and debit.

This really makes living in America easier for me.

Also, at Shelton University there are lots of great ESL courses. I can take grammar or writing, or speaking courses. There is a course for every level. For me, the best course was English for Business. In that class, Professor Morrison showed me how to write a resume and a cover letter. Because of this, I now have a part time job as a Spanish-English translator.

Finally, Shelton University has a good location. Its right downtown and very close to the subway station.

It takes me just five minutes from the station to school. This is very convenient. Best of all, I dont have to drive my car and find a parking place, which is always a pain.

Those, I believe, are the qualities of a good school, like my school, Shelton University.

Words: 212 Writing Practice TASK: Using G+3TiC=C or G+2TiC=C and the six steps, write a basic independent essay that demonstrates OPDUL=C for each of the following prompts you have already studied (see the end of the chapter for a step-by-step guide). If you need help, go back and look at the sample responses. Check each essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310.

Rate each essay using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312. By doing so, you will memorize G+3TiC=C and OPDUL=C. You will also be ready to learn advanced strategies to maximize scoring.

We need zoos. Do you agree or disagree? Why? Give examples and reasons to support your opinion.

Television is a good influence on children. Do you agree or disagree?

Why? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

Do you prefer to use a laptop computer or a desktop computer? Why?

State your position using examples and reasons.

What do you think a friend might like and not like about the place you call home? Why? Develop your position using examples and reasons.

Eating out has both positive and negative aspects. What are they? Why?

Develop your argument using examples and reasons.

What are the advantages and disadvantages of owning a car? State your opinion using illustrations and reasons.

What are the advantages of telecommuting? State your argument using examples and reasons.

What are the disadvantages of getting a university degree online?

Develop your argument using illustrations and reasons.

Which technology in the past fifty years has changed your life the most?

Why? Develop your position using examples and reasons.

Why do people travel? Use examples and reasons to support your argument.

If you could change the world, what would you do? Give illustrations and reasons to support your argument.

How has technology made our lives better? Develop your argument using examples and reasons.

Advanced Introduction Strategies To maximize scoring, apply the following advanced introduction strategies to develop a basic independent essay into an advanced independent essay.

Simple Hooks The purpose of a hook is to capture or hook the readers attention in the very first sentence of your essay. For the independent essay, there are two types of hook: simple and complex. A simple hook uses the information in the prompt. In the following examples, notice how the hook comes first, followed by the transition and the opinion. Combined, they form the general introduction of your essay, G.

introduction (G) = hook + transition + opinion a. Or Question Hook For this hook, start with an or question. Next, write a transition, then answer the question. The answer is your opinion, for example: G Do we need zoos or not? From my point of view, I believe that we need zoos.

b. Restate-the-Prompt Hook For this hook, first restate (paraphrase) the prompt. Next, write a transition, then state your opinion, for example: G The question is whether we need zoos or not. As far as I am concerned, I assert that we need zoos.

c. Pro-Con Hook For this hook, state the pro (positive) side and the con (negative) side of the topic. Next, write a transition, then state your opinion, for example: G Some people think that we dont need zoos while others think that we do.

Personally speaking, I posit that we need zoos.

d. General Fact + Or Question Hook For this hook, start with a general fact. Next, ask an or question about that fact including both the pro and the con sides of the argument. Next, write a transition, then answer the question. The answer is your opinion, for example: G Zoos are popular all over the world. Yet do we need them or not? In my estimation, I believe that we need zoos.

Complex Hooks A complex hook uses information from researched sources, information you bring to the test. Look at the following complex hooks.

a. Statistic Hook A statistic hook uses numbers (data) to capture reader attention, for example: According to Educational Testing Services, for the year ending 2008, the average worldwide TOEFL iBT score was 79/120.

b. Definition Hook A definition begins an essay by giving a dictionary-like definition, for example: Telecommuting, or e-commuting, is a work arrangement in which an employee works at home and is connected to his or her office by means of a telecommunications link.

c. Shocking-Statistic Hook A shocking-statistic hook is often stated as a question, for example: Did you know that next year, six million people will die from smoking cigarettes?

Thats equal to forty-seven 747s crashing every day for a year.

d. Famous-Quote Hook When using a famous-quote hook, make sure you state the quote exactly (verbatim) using the correct punctuation and quotation marks, for example: Thomas Edison once said, Genius is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent perspiration.

e. Idiom Hook When using an idiom hook, make sure you state the idiom verbatim, for example: Correct: My mother always said, The early bird catches the worm.

Incorrect: My mother always said, The morning bird catches the worm.

f. Anecdote Hook An anecdote is a very short story used to introduce the main topic of your essay. An anecdote can be either humorous or serious, for example: I have been speaking English for twenty years, but I still have a hard time pronouncing some words. Take yesterday for example. I asked a waitress for a bowel. She looked at me like I was crazy until my American friend said bowl.

Last year, my friend Hiroshi took an online MBA course. It cost a lot of money, but he enrolled anyway because he could finish in six months. The day after he started studying, the school suddenly closed and Hiroshi lost all his money.

g. Provocative Hook When using a provocative hook, make sure you can support what you are claiming.

Did you know that a gun is the best form of personal protection?

Complex hooks will test your language use proficiency (OPDUL=C). If you are confident of your writing abilityand the information you bring to the teststart your essay with a complex hook, for example: A report in Pediatrics states that by age sixteen, teenagers who watch TV shows with a high degree of sexual content are twice as likely to have babies out of wedlock than those teens who watch TV with a low degree of sexual content. This evidence proves that television is indeed having a negative influence on the youth of America. It also supports my belief that parents are failing to monitor their childrens viewing habits.

The first part of this introduction is a complex hook, specifically a statistic.

hook A report in Pediatrics states that by age sixteen teenagers who watch TV shows with a high degree of sexual content are twice as likely to have babies out of wedlock than those teens who watch TV with a low degree of sexual content.

Next comes the transition.

transition This evidence proves that television is indeed having a negative influence on the youth of America.

The transition is followed by the test-takers opinion.

opinion It also supports my belief that parents are failing to monitor their childrens viewing habits.

Notice how the transitions This evidence and It also connect the three parts of this introduction, grammatically and topically (OPDUL=C). This, in turn, demonstrates coherence (OPDUL=C).

Hooks: Avoid this Problem!

Look at the following introduction. Can you identify the problem?

Did you know that every hour three animal species become extinct? Personally, I think that all governments should ban the logging of old growth forests.

This introduction demonstrates a common problem test-takers make when starting their independent essays with a hook: No transition between the hook and the opinion.

Look at the same introduction mapped out. Because there is no transition between the hook and the opinion, this introduction demonstrates a lack of organization, development, progression, unity and language use (OPDUL=C). The result is a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C).

hook Did you know that every hour three animal species become extinct?

transition ?

opinion Personally, I think that all governments should ban the logging of old growth forests.

Sometimes there is a transition. However, the transition is not topically or grammatically connected to the hook or the opinion, for example: hook Did you know that more people are telecommuting these days?

transition I would love to do this. It would be great.

opinion Personally, I think that there are advantages to working from home.

A good hook is hard to write. If you are not confident using hooks, do not waste time trying to write one on test day. Instead, state your opinion, then concentrate on developing each body paragraph (3TiC).

Inverted-Pyramid Introduction Why is a hook an effective advanced strategy? Because your introduction (hook + transition + opinion) will look like an inverted (upside down) pyramid in which the ideas progress from general to specific.

The writing raters will look for an inverted-pyramid introduction. An inverted-pyramid introduction demonstrates OPDUL=C.

Does this introduction demonstrate organization?

The test-taker is using an inverted pyramid that includes a hook, a transition and the test-takers opinion. This demonstrates organization.

Yes No _ Does this introduction demonstrate progression?

The hook is a general statement. It is connected to the opinion by the transition Personally speaking. This demonstrates progression from general (hook) to specific (opinion). Yes No _ Does this introduction demonstrate development?

The hook introduces the general topic of zoos and whether we need them or not. The test-takers opinion focuses the topic by specifically stating, I think that we need zoos. The test-takers opinion is arguable, supportable, a complete sentence and not a question.

Combined, this demonstrates introduction development. Yes No _ a. Does this introduction demonstrate topical unity?

The topic of zoos in the hook and in the opinion are the same. This demonstrates topical unity. Yes No _ b. Does this introduction demonstrate grammatical unity?

The transition, Personally speaking, connects the hook and the opinion, and is grammatically correct. All other grammar is correct.

This demonstrates grammatical unity. Yes No _ Does this introduction demonstrate proficient language use?

The sentence, Some people think that we do not need zoos while others think that we do is a complex sentence. This demonstrates proficient language use. Yes No _ Does this introduction demonstrate coherence?

Because of proficient Organization, Progression, Development, Unity and Language Use, this introduction demonstrates coherence (OPDUL=C) in the shape of an inverted-pyramid. Yes No _ Advanced Thesis Strategies To maximize scoring, apply the following advanced thesis strategies to develop a basic independent essay into an advanced independent essay.

Predictor Thesis Read the following theses.

Thesis # 1 Personally, I think that we need zoos.

Thesis #2 Personally, I think that we need zoos because they are educational, they are fun for families, and they look after endangered animals.

Thesis # 1 is a general thesis. In contrast, thesis #2 is a predictor thesis. To predict means to identify in advance. Notice how thesis #2 is predicting three topics, one for each body paragraph. The topic predicted in body paragraph # 1 is They (zoos) are educational; the topic predicted in body paragraph #2 is They (zoos) are fun for families; the topic predicted in body paragraph #3 is They (zoos) look after endangered animals.

Writing a Predictor Thesis A predictor thesis is a complex sentence. A complex sentence has two parts: independent clause and dependent clause. An independent clause has a subject and a verb. Together, they form a complete idea. In a predictor thesis, the independent clause states your opinion about the topic in the prompt. The independent clause connects to the dependent clause with a conjunction. The dependent clause contains the predictors. The predictors are reasons. You will develop each reason using an example in each body paragraph. The reasons, in turn, will support your opinion and conclusion.

Look at the following predictor thesis. Notice how each predictor becomes a topic sentence in each body paragraph. The topic sentence is the first sentence. Notice also how they becomes the topic identifier Zoos in each body paragraph topic sentence (TiC).

To shorten the predictor, delete the subject and verb in the second and third predictors.

Add transitions to identify the start of each body paragraph topic sentence.

TiC First, zoos are educational. For example TiC Also, zoos are fun for families. For example TiC Moreover, zoos protect endangered animals. For example A predictor thesis demonstrates organization, progression, development and unity (OPDUL=C). It also demonstrates proficient language use (OPDUL=C), specifically parallelism.

Predictor Thesis: Parallelism Look at the following predictor thesis.

Notice how the grammar on either side of the conjunction and is the same.

The plural subjects they refer to the plural object zoos. The plural they takes the plural verbs are and protect. This grammatical equality (syntactical balance) is called parallelism.

In the next example, notice how the grammatical balance is incorrect. When the balance is incorrect, there is a lack of parallelism.

Because this predictor thesis lacks parallelism, it demonstrates a lack of proficient language use (OPDUL=C). This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

TASK: For parallelism practice, go to page 328. Check your answers on page 331.

Gerund Predictor Thesis Another way to develop your introduction is to use a gerund predictor thesis.

Look at the predictor thesis below. Notice that it is two sentences.

Personally, I believe that the internet is a dangerous place. Using the internet increases the risk of identify theft and the risk of downloading viruses.

The first sentence is a general thesis (O). It identifies the topic and the test-takers opinion about the topic.

Personally, I believe that the internet is a dangerous place.

The second sentence is the predictor. Notice how it begins with a gerund phrase. A gerund is an ingnoun (Using) followed by an object (the internet).

Together, they form the subject. The verbs and their objects are the predictors joined by the conjunction and.

Using the internet increases the risk of identify theft and increases the risk of downloading viruses.

In the following example, notice how the grammar on either side of the conjunction and is parallel. This demonstrates grammatical unity (OPDUL=C) and coherence (OPDUL=C).

In the following example, notice how the predictor is not parallel after the gerund Exercising. This demonstrates a lack of grammatical unity (OPDUL=C) and a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C).

To make this predictor parallel, change to keep to keeps.

TASK: For practice using gerund predictors, go to page 329. Check your answers on page 332.

Predictor Thesis: Using Synonyms Look the following predictor thesis.

Personally, I think that there are many advantages to working from home such as privacy, cost and seeing my children more.

To demonstrate language use, replace Personally with a synonymous phrase, for example: Next, look at the main verb think followed by that.

Personally, I think that there are many advantages to working from home such as privacy, cost and seeing my children more.

Replace think that with a synonymous phrase. This will demonstrate language use (OPDUL=C).

1. In my opinion, I claim that there are advantages to working from home, such as privacy, cost and seeing my children more.

2. As far as Im concerned, I assert that there are advantages to working from home, for example privacy, cost and seeing my children more.

3. In my experience, I feel that there are advantages to working from home, including privacy, convenience and less stress.

4. In my view, I posit that there are advantages to working from home, namely privacy, cost and spending more time with my children.

5. From my perspective, I contend that there are advantages to working from home, specifically privacy, cost and seeing my children more.

6. Personally speaking, I believe that there are advantages to working from home, including privacy, cost and seeing my children more.

7. In my estimation, I conclude that there are advantages to working from home, such as privacy, cost and seeing my children more.

8. In my opinion, I postulate that there are advantages to working from home, including privacy, convenience and seeing my children more.

9. Personally speaking, I reason that there are advantages to working from home, specifically privacy, cost and less stress.

10. From my perspective, I think that there are advantages to working from home, for example privacy, cost and spending more time with my children.

1. Predictor Thesis: When to Write There are two ways to write a predictor thesis. The first way is to write a predictor thesis when you map out and develop notes in Step #2.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (3TiC).

When developing a predictor thesis this way, first identify the question in the prompt. Next, choose a position to argue. If you agree, ask yourself Why?

In this case, Why do we needs zoos?

Prompt We need zoos. Do you agree or disagree? Why?

Give examples and reasons to develop your opinion.

Answer the question Why do we need zoos? three times. Each answer will be a body paragraph topic that will support your opinion and conclusion.

Each answer will also be one of your three predictors (reasons).

After each predictor, write for example. Restate the predictors in your conclusion (for restating predictors in your conclusion, see Conclusion Strategies).

When you are finished mapping out your essay, complete it by following the remaining four steps.

Step #3 Type a first draft.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

2. Predictor Thesis: When to Write A second way to write a predictor thesis is to work backwards. Do so by first mapping out, then writing, a basic independent essay up to Step #5.

Step #1 Read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Step #2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (3TiC).

Step #3 Type a first draft.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Personally, I agree. I think that we need zoos.

For example, when I was 12, my teacher took us to the zoo in Berlin. I had never seen wild animals before. I had just read about them in books and seen them on the TV. But seeing them in real life was amazing, especially the lions. On TV, they looked so small, but seeing them alive they were really big. By going to the zoo, I definitely saw things in a whole new light.

Now I have a family and we always go to the zoo every summer. My wife makes a picnic and we spend all day there. My kids love taking pictures and learning all about the animals, especially the gorillas.

Being outside is good for my children. Best of all, they can leave the internet and the TV at home.

Also, zoos look after endangered animals like pandas.

I saw two in the Washington DC zoo last year and they had a baby. If there were no zoos, the pandas would disappear because we are taking their land away. However, in a zoo the pandas are safe. It is not perfect, but without zoos there might not be any pandas left.

For those reasons, I think that we need zoos.

When you finish Step #5, you can: a) submit your essay if you have run out of time, or; b) if you have time, add a predictor thesis.

If you have timeand you want to add a predictor thesisfirst identify the main topic in each body paragraph. In this essay, the main topic in body paragraph one is education; the main topic in body paragraph two is families; the main topic in body paragraph three paragraph is endangered animals.

Next, combine the main topics and make a predictor thesis.

Next: 1) add your predictor thesis to your introduction; 2) write a topic sentence for each body paragraph; 3) restate your predictor thesis in your conclusion.

1) Personally, I agree. I think that we need zoos because they are educational, they are fun for families and they protect endangered animals.

2) Zoos are educational. For example, when I was 12, my teacher took us to the zoo in Berlin. I had never seen wild animals before. I had just read about them in books and seen them on the TV. But seeing them in real life was amazing, especially the lions. On TV, they looked so small, but seeing them alive they were really big. By going to the zoo, I definitely saw things in a whole new light.

3) Zoos are also fun for families. For example, I have a family and we always go to the zoo every summer.

My wife makes a picnic and we spend all day there.

My kids love taking pictures and learning all about the animals, especially the gorillas. Being outside is good for my children. Best of all, they can leave the internet and the TV at home.

4) Finally, zoos protect endangered animals. For example, I saw two pandas in the Washington DC zoo last year and they had a baby. If there were no zoos, the pandas would disappear because we are taking their land away. However, in a zoo the pandas are safe. It is not perfect, but without zoos there might not be any pandas left.

5) For those reasons, I believe that we need zoos because they are educational, they are fun for families and they protect endangered animals.

Words: 251 Step #6 Submit your essay.

Advanced Conclusion Strategies To maximize scoring, apply the following advanced conclusion strategies to develop a basic independent essay into an advanced independent essay.

a. Suggestion For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a suggestion.

In sum, I assert that television is a bad influence on our children. Instead of watching so much television, parents should make their kids read a book, or make them go outside and play.

As I have illustrated, I believe that we need zoos. If you want to have fun and learn something new, you should go to a zoo.

b. Suggestion + Prediction For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a suggestion and a prediction. Notice how the prediction contains the auxiliary verb will to describe a future action.

In the final analysis, I contend that television is bad influence on our children.

They should spend at least one hour a day playing outside. It will make them happier and healthier In the end, I posit that it is better to save the money that you make. The best thing you can do is put your money in the bank. In a few years, that money will help you buy a new car or help you go to university.

c. Warning + Prediction For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a warning that contains a prediction of future of events.

It goes without saying that television is a bad influence on our children. It is creating a lot of fat and lazy kids who will develop serious health problems when they are adults.

As far as Im concerned, I believe that a new factory in my home town is not a good idea. It will create a lot of pollution and destroy our beautiful neighborhoods with more traffic.

d. Rhetorical Question For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a rhetorical question. A rhetorical question will make your reader think about your argument after your essay has ended.

Suffice it to say, I think that a new factory in my home town is not a good idea.

How would you like a big smelly factory in your backyard?

In my estimation, I believe that telecommuting has many advantages. Dont you wish you could just fall out of bed and go to work in your pajamas?

e. Call-To-Action For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a call-to-action. Call-to-action means to tell people to do something (take action) with an emphatic (strong) voice.

In sum, I conclude that television is a bad influence on our children. Parents, turn off the TV now!

Finally, I assert that a new airport will be good for our town. Support the new airport! Invest in our future!

f. Call-To-Action + Rhetorical Question For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, give a call-to-action, then end with a rhetorical question.

In closing, I believe that television is a bad influence on our children. Parents, turn off the TV now! Do you really want unhealthy kids who are violent too?

When all is said and done, I contend that a new airport will be good for our town. Support the new airport! Dont you want to create jobs?

You can also state the rhetorical question first, then end with a call-to-action.

In closing, I conclude that television is a bad influence on our children. Do you really want unhealthy kids who are violent too? Parents, turn off the TV now!

When all is said and done, I contend that a new airport will be good for our town. Dont you want to create jobs? Support the new airport!

g. Suggestion + Prediction + Rhetorical Question For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, make a suggestion and a prediction, then end with a rhetorical question.

In the final analysis, I conclude that television is a bad influence on our children. If you are a parent, tell your kids to turn the TV off and read or go outside and play. Doing so will definitely make your kids happier and healthier.

Isnt that how you want your kids to grow up?

All in all, I contend that the internet is a dangerous place. If you do not want to lose your money and your personal identification, you should always use spyware software when you surf the internet. Spyware software will protect you from internet criminals. Better safe than sorry, right?

h. Predictor Thesis Restated in Your Conclusion To develop your conclusion, restate your predictor thesis in your conclusion.

After you restate your predictor thesis, add a conclusion strategy.

In sum, I assert that we need zoos because they are educational, fun for families and protect endangered animals. Visit a zoo. You will definitely have a good time and learn something new.

For those reasons, I posit that exercising reduces stress, makes me healthier and helps me sleep better. If you want a happier and healthier life, you too should exercise every day.

i. Predictor Conclusion + Synonyms Look the following predictor thesis restated in the conclusion.

In conclusion, I believe that there are many advantages to working from home, such as privacy, cost and seeing my children more.

To demonstrate language use, replace the transition In conclusion with a synonymous phrase, for example: Pyramid Conclusion Why is an advanced conclusion an effective strategy? Because your conclusion will look like a pyramid in which the ideas progress from specific to general.

The writing raters will look for a pyramid conclusion. A pyramid conclusion demonstrates OPDUL=C.

Does this conclusion demonstrate organization?

The test-taker is using a pyramid structure starting with the restated opinion (specific) followed by a suggestion, a prediction and a rhetorical question (general). This demonstrates organization. Yes No _ Does this conclusion demonstrate progression?

The ideas move from the specific restating of the test-takers opinion to the stating of a general suggestion, prediction and rhetorical question.

This demonstrates progression. Yes No _ Does this conclusion demonstrate development?

The conclusion restates the test-takers opinion while the suggestion, prediction and question offer general solutions to the problem of television being a bad influence. This demonstrates development. Yes No a. Does this conclusion demonstrate topical unity?

The topic of television in the restated opinion and the topic in the suggestion, prediction and question are the same. This demonstrates topical unity. Yes No _ b. Does this conclusion demonstrate grammatical unity?

There are no errors in grammar. The demonstrates grammatical unity.

Yes No _ Does this conclusion demonstrate proficient language use?

This conclusion uses a variety of sentence types including a conditional (If you are a parent, you should tell your kids to turn the TV off and do something else, like read or go out and play and meet new friends), the future tense (Doing so will definitely make your kids happier and healthier) and a rhetorical question (Isnt that how you want your kids to grow up?) Combined, these sentences demonstrates proficient language use, specifically word choice and sentence variety. Yes No _ Does this conclusion demonstrate coherence?

I Because of proficient Organization, Progression, Development, Unity and Language Use, this conclusion demonstrates coherence (OPDUL=C). Yes No _ Notes Advanced Independent Essays The following essays demonstrate how advanced strategies can turn a basic independent essay into an advanced independent essay. Check the rating for each essay on page 338.

ETS says: [A]n effective [independent] essay will usually contain a minimum of three hundred words.

Demonstrate OPDUL=C first, then count words.

Agree-Disagree Prompt Do we or dont we need zoos? Personally, I agree with the statement. I think that we need zoos. We need zoos because they are educational, they are fun for families and they protect endangered animals.

Zoos are educational. For example, when I was 12, my teacher took us to the zoo in Berlin. I had never seen wild animals before. I had just read about them in books and seen them on the TV. But seeing them in real life was amazing, especially the lions. On TV, they looked so small, but seeing them alive they were really big. By going to the zoo, I definitely saw things in a whole new light.

Zoos are also fun for families. For example, I have a family and we always go to the zoo every summer.

My wife makes a picnic and we spend all day there.

My kids love taking pictures and learning all about the animals, especially the gorillas. Being outside is good for my children. Best of all, they can leave the internet and the TV at home.

Finally, zoos protect endangered animals. For example, I saw two pandas in the Washington DC zoo last year and they had a baby. If there were no zoos, the pandas would disappear because we are taking their land away. However, in a zoo the pandas are safe. It is not perfect, but without zoos there might not be any pandas left.

For those reasons, I believe that we need zoos because they are educational, they are fun for families and they protect endangered animals. If you want to have fun and learn something new, you should go to a zoo.

Words: 280 Preference Prompt Today, people have a big choice between laptop computers and desktop computers. So which do I prefer? Personally, I prefer a laptop because a laptop is great for taking notes in class, portable and affordable.

A laptop is great for taking notes in class. For example, Im a university student and I need a laptop for my classes. If I didnt have a laptop, Id have to take notes by hand, and that would be really slow.

Also, my handwriting is really bad, but with my laptop I can quickly take notes. This saves me a lot of time. I couldnt take notes with a desktop. It is too big and not made for carrying. As you can see, a laptop is definitely best for taking notes in class.

Also, a laptop is portable. For example, I can take my laptop anywhere to study. This is good because sometimes my roommate plays really loud music.

This drives me nuts. When he plays his music, I cant do any homework, so I go the library or Starbucks.

There I can do my homework and connect to the internet with Wi-Fi. Because my laptop is portable, I can do these things. Best of all, I dont have to listen to my roommates music.

In addition, a laptop is affordable. For example, a few years ago laptops, like my Sony Vaio, were very expensive but now you can get a really fast laptop with lots of memory for cheaper than a desktop. This is good because I can save money. With this money, I can buy other school things like books.

In the final analysis, I definitely prefer a laptop because it is great for taking notes in class, portable and affordable. What more do I need?

Words: 294 Compare-Contrast Prompt What will my friend like and not like when visiting the place I call home, New Delhi, India? Personally speaking, I contend that my friend will like the food however he will not be crazy about the summer temperatures or the crowds.

My friend will like the delicious food in New Delhi.

When I am hungry, I go to Sheshrajs, the best restaurant in New Delhi. The prices are very reasonable and you get a lot of food. The lamb curry is excellent as is the aloo gobi. For a good meal, my friend can spend maybe one American dollar. Eating at Sheshrajs will definitely give my friend a real New Delhi experience that is both affordable and delicious.

However, my friend will not like summer in New Delhi. The temperature can reach 120F plus the humidity is high as well. This makes New Delhi uncomfortable in the summer. Unlike America, air conditioning is not found everywhere in New Delhi.

This is most evident on the trains and buses. With the high temperatures and the high humidity, this can make traveling difficult. Because of these factors, my friend may want to avoid visiting New Delhi in the summer.

As mentioned, New Delhi is crowded. My friend might not like this because he comes from a small town in Connecticut, so he does not feel the pressure of big city life. Also, he does not see any poverty because Connecticut is wealthy unlike parts of New Delhi which are extremely poor. This might be a big shock for my friend since he is not used to such cultural extremes.

As illustrated, there are many reasons why my friend will like and wont like New Delhi. However, this should not stop him from visiting. I guarantee he will have a wonderful time.

Words: 300 Advantage-Disadvantage Prompt The question is what are the advantages and disadvantages of owning a car. From my experience, I can safely say that an advantage of owning a car is freedom and a disadvantage is the cost.

A big advantage of owning a car is freedom. For example, I have a Honda. With my car, I can go anywhere I want. Before I bought a car, however, I had to take the bus everywhere. Sometimes the bus was late, so I got to work late. My boss didnt like that. But since I bought a car, Ive never been late for work. Also, I can go for a drive in the country or go shopping and I dont have to worry about bus schedules or money for tickets. This is a big advantage of owning a car.

In contrast, owning a car can be very expensive. For example, I drive to work every day. The distance is fifty miles from my house to my office. That means I use a lot of gasoline. In a week, I can spend more than $75.00 on gas. If the price of gas is higher, I spend more. Insurance and repairs can also be expensive.

Tires and parking too. As a result, I have to budget my money and spend less on clothes and video games, and other things I like. This is definitely a disadvantage.

As I have illustrated, I think that there are advantages and disadvantages to owning a car. Should you buy a car? Yes. Its a no brainer. Go for it. Buy a car and be free! Just watch your money!

Words: 269 Advantage Prompt What is telecommuting? Telecommuting means you can work from home while being connected to your office by the internet. Personally, I prefer to work from home. Working from home has many advantages, such as more privacy, less stress and seeing my children more.

First, telecommuting gives me more privacy. For example, at work I have a cubicle. Its really noisy because people are always talking and using the copy machine. Also, people are always stopping and saying hello to me. This is not good because it wastes a lot of time. It also makes it hard for me to finish my work.

But if I work from home, nobody bothers me and I finish my work without interruption. This is an advantage of telecommuting.

Also, with telecommuting there is less stress. When I go to work, I must get up early and drive. It takes an hour and the traffic is always bad. If there is an accident, I get to work late. That means I have to stay late to finish my assignments. But if I work from home, I dont have to worry about getting up early or about traffic or being late for work. This is another big advantage of telecommuting.

Finally, working from home lets me see my children more. My children are very young, only seven and eight. I drop them off at day care when I go to work but when I work from home, I can look after them.

This really saves me money. Also, I can spend more time with my children. This makes us all very happy.

This is the best advantage of telecommuting.

Suffice it to say, telecommuting has a myriad of advantages. Dont you wish you could just fall out of bed and go to work in your pajamas?

Words: 300 Disadvantage Prompt Last year, I wanted to get an MBA, so I took an online course. I thought Id have time to do all the work; however, I soon realized that I didnt have enough time. I couldnt study during the week because I was too busy at work. On the weekends, I didnt want to study either. I just wanted to be with my family and relax. As a result, I didnt do any homework and I didnt finish the course. Obviously, if you have no time like me, an online course is not a good way to get a university degree.

Also, if you are going to take an online course, you must be careful about the schools reputation. For example, my friend Maria had a job interview at this company and they asked about her diploma she got online. They thought it was fake because theyd never heard of her school before. This made Maria feel two inches small because shed worked so hard to get her degree. Unfortunately, she didnt get the job.

Something like this also happened to my friend Hiroshi. Hes really good with computers, so he took an IT course because he wanted a computer job. The course cost him a lot of money, but he took it anyway because he could finish in six months and get a job.

However, the day after he started studying, the school suddenly closed and Hiroshi lost all his money. Now, he has no school, no money and no job.

As you can see, studying online is like gambling.

Does this mean you should not take an e-course? No.

Just look before you leap!

Words: 276 Reason Prompt Because Im a scientist, I use many technologies.

However, I can honestly say that the technology that has changed my life the most is the internet. Using the internet makes communication fast and easy, is good for research and it saves me money.

First, the internet makes communication fast and easy.

For example, Im from China and Im now working in the United States. That means my family and friends back in Beijing are very far away. Yet by using the internet, I can talk to them as much as I want. The best way is Skype. Using Skype, I can see their faces and they can see mine. Before the internet, people like my parents had to send letters. That took so long. But the internet has changed all that. The internet makes communication fast and easy for me and my family.

Its like magic. Best of all, I dont get homesick.

Next, the internet is good for research. Im a research physicist developing lasers for weather testing. To research my ideas, I always use the internet. Its good for finding articles and the latest research papers that can help me with my research. If I didnt have the internet Id have to go to libraries. But with the internet, all I have to do is search with Google and I have the information right at my fingertips.

Finally, the internet saves me money. When I have questions about my work, I can email scientists all over the world for answers. This saves money because I dont have to travel. Also, scientists can contact me and ask questions. For example, last week a scientist from Norway emailed me and asked about my work.

Before the internet, he would have had to have flown or called long distance. This is very expensive. But now scientists can save time and money using the internet.

In sum, the internet has changed my life the most.

Using the internet is fast and easy, is great for research and it saves me money. Can you imagine a world without the internet?

Words: 347 Quality Prompt What are the qualities of a good university?

Personally, I posit that a good university should have many qualities, such as excellent teachers, lots of good courses and a convenient location.

A good university should have excellent teachers. For example, I study ESL at Shelton University. The teachers there have lots of teaching experience. Also, many of them have taught English in foreign countries. This is good because the teachers at Shelton University can understand my situation in America. In other words, the teachers can see life through my eyes and know that learning a new language is not easy, especially when living in a new culture.

Moreover, a good university should have a variety of courses. For example, at Shelton University there are lots of great ESL courses. I can take grammar, idioms and composition. I can even take TOEFL! For me, the best course was English for Business. In that class, Professor Morrison showed me how to write a resume and a cover letter. Because of this, I now have a part time job as a Spanish-English translator.

Furthermore, a good university should have a convenient location. Shelton University has a great location. Its right downtown and very close to the subway station. It takes me just five minutes from the station to school. This is so convenient. Best of all, I dont have to drive my car and find a parking place, which is always a hassle.

As the aforementioned examples have illustrated, a good university should have many qualities, such as excellent teachers, lots of great courses and a convenient location. If you want to study ESL in America, you should check out Shelton University.

You wont be disappointed.

Words: 283 Emergency Independent Essay What if you cant write an independent essay? What if you blank out? What should you do? Follow these five steps and write an emergency independent essay.

When writing an emergency independent essay, use induction as the method of organization (3TiC=C) and follow the six steps.

Why should I use induction as the method of organization?

You are blanking out because you are nervous. If this happens, you must start writing. Remember: Writing is thinking. The best way to start thinking is to start writing about an example. When you start your essay with an example, you are using induction as a method of organization. As you write, you will think of other examples. Each example will be a body paragraph (3TiC). From these examples, you will be able to make a conclusion (C).

Emergency Response: Step-by-Step Lets work through an emergency independent essay using 3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt.

Prompt What event changed your life? Why? Give examples and reasons to explain your position.

Next, go directly to step #3 and start writing.

Step #3 Type a first draft.

Start by developing one personal example. Use narration and description. Write like you are telling a story to a friend.

Dont worry about mistakes. Just write.

When I was in university I always see an old woman.

She was homeless she live on the street she had a dog and some box. She live on the corner. I saw her in good weather and bad. When he see me she always wave and say hello. Always she smile. I thought was strange. But I talk to her and she was a nice. her name was Ana. She never ask for money or nothin. She just talk about life. Ana, she tell me something I never forget. She say she wished she could go to school. she never went she loved history she want to be a teacher.

She told me to always stay in school. Education very important! I always remember her because I was thinking of leaving my university but I did not. Ana was a big event in my life. Her words give me strength to study hard Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

When you revise your first draft, make sure you: 1) establish the context (the time and place) in the first sentence; 2) have transitions connecting the body paragraphs; 3) state a conclusion at the end.

When I was a university student in Peru, I always saw an old homeless woman. All she had was a dog and some boxes. I saw her in good weather and bad. When she saw me, she always waved and said hello. I thought she was strange, always so happy, so I avoided her. But then one day I talked to her and she was really nice. Her name was Ana. She never asked for money or anything. She just wanted to talk and be friends.

One day Ana told me something I have never forgotten. She said she really wanted to go to university when she was young. She said she always loved history. Unfortunately, she came from a poor family and had no chance to go to school. She told me to stay in school. Education, she said, is very important.

In sum, I will always remember what Ana said because I was thinking of leaving my university. But I didnt. I graduated and got a good job. As you can see, Ana was a big event in my life. Her wisdom gave me strength to continue my studies and be who am I today. Thank you, Ana. God bless you.

Words: 203 Step #6 Submit your essay.

If you blank out, do not stop writing. Writing is thinking. The more you write, the more you will think. The more you think, the more ideas will come to you.

Contrarian Response What if you think the question in the prompt is strange, doesnt make sense, or is not asking the right question? How can you respond? If this happens, write a contrarian essay. Read the following prompt, then read the contrarian response.

Step #1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

Prompt Television is bad for children. Do you agree or disagree? Why? Use examples and reasons to support your argument.

Next, complete steps 2, 3, 4 and 5.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

The question asks whether television is bad for children. Personally, I dont agree or disagree. The fact is television is neither good nor bad for children.

Television is just an electronic device that delivers information. The real problem is those parents who do not control what their children watch on television.

For example, my friend Pierre lets his kids watch TV all the time. Whenever I go over to his house, his kids are always watching violent movies like Terminator and Die Hard. When Pierre tells them to do their homework or go outside and play, his kids just yell and fight, and Pierre does nothing to stop them. His kids want to watch garbage all day, so he lets them watch garbage all day. Pierre is a great guy but as you can see, the TV is controlling him. As a result, his kids are out of control.

In contrast, my friend Carla lets her kids watch only two hours of TV every night. Before her kids can watch TV, however, they must do their homework.

Then, when they watch TV, Carla tells her kids which shows they can watch, like National Geographic, and which shows they cant watch, like violent movies.

This way Carla controls the TV. By doing do, she makes sure that television is a good influence on her kids.

As illustrated, television is neither good nor bad for children. The question should be about parents, and how well they control the TV.

Word: 247 In the contrarian essay above, the test-taker is arguing that the prompt is asking the wrong question. By doing so, the test-taker suggests what the proper question should be, then develops and supports that argument with examples.

Make sure your contrarian essay is serious. Avoid this type of response.

What a stupid question!!! TV is not good or bad. Its the parents. They are the problem. Like my friend Pierre. His kids watch TV all the time and they are monsters. But Carlas kids are angels cuz she lets them watch only two hours of TV every night. And good TV. Not bad.

As you can see, the above response is not serious. This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

Make sure your contrarian essay is a serious argument. Even if you think the prompt is asking the wrong question, you must still demonstrate OPDUL=C.

The writing raters do not care about your opinion. They simply want to know if you can construct a coherent independent essay in 30 minutes.

Writing Practice TASK: Use G+3TiC=C or G+2TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C for each prompt below. Time yourself. You have 30 minutes. Check each essay for coherence using the Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 310. Rate each essay using the Independent Essay Rating Guide on page 312.

Before an important exam, do you think it is better to prepare for a long time or only for a few days? Give examples and reasons to support your argument.

What are the advantages and disadvantages of living in a foreign country? Give illustrations and reasons to develop your opinion.

Which teacher has had the greatest influence on your life? Why? Give examples and reasons to support and develop your opinion.

Some prefer to stay home while on vacation while others prefer to travel.

Which do you prefer? Why? Give examples and reasons to support your position.

Many people leave their home country. Why? Give illustrations and reasons to support your argument.

What is your idea of the perfect neighborhood? Support your opinion with examples and reasons.

When is the best time to go on a vacation? Support your argument using examples and reasons.

Is it better to buy a product when you want it at the regular price or wait for the product when it is on sale? Use examples and reasons to argue your position.

In America, customers can return a purchased item for a full refund within thirty days. Do you agree or disagree with this policy? Develop your position with illustrations and reasons.

University education should be free. Do you agree or disagree? Why?

Use examples and reason to develop your argument.

Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of using a cell phone. Give illustrations and reasons to support your opinion.

Do you agree or disagree. Every student should travel or work for a year being going to university or college. Support your argument using examples and reasons.

What Have You Learned?

In this chapter, you learned how to write and revise a variety of independent essays using G+3TiC=C and G+2TiC=C and the six steps. By doing so, you can demonstrate OPDUL=C in an independent essay.

Note: Total writing time is 30 minutes.

#1 Carefully read the prompt; formulate an opinion.

#2 Make a note map; state your opinion (G); restate it in your conclusion (C); develop examples (3TiC).

#3 Type a first draft.

#4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

#5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

#6 Submit your essay.

Test-takers who get high independent essay scores have practiced writing a lot.

* Throughout this text, the words scoring and rating are synonymous.

Integrated Essay The integrated essay will test your ability to integrate three skills: reading, listening and writing objectively. First, you will read and summarize a reading passage. Next, you will listen to and summarize a lecture on the same topic as in the reading. Finally, you will integrate (combine) both summaries in a short, fact-based essay. You may take notes. You must type your essay. The task order follows.

Prompt Types For this task, you will write one essay; however, there are two prompt types: the argument-counter argument prompt and the show-support prompt.

Argument-Counter Argument Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they cast doubt on the points made in the reading.

Show-Support Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they add to and support the information in the reading.

Which integrated writing prompt can I expect on test day?

Expect the argument-counter argument prompt. ETS uses this prompt more Argument-Counter Argument Essay For this task, you will summarize the personal-opinion arguments made by two professors. Look at the following prompt.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they cast doubt on the points made in the reading.

For this task, you must: take notesas you read and listen; summarizethe main points in the reading and in the lecture; synthesizethe main points in the reading and in the lecture; paraphrasethe main points in the reading and in the lecture; demonstratehow the lecture casts doubt on the reading.

You can proficiently demonstrate all of the above using G+3TiC=C to map out and write your integrated essay. By doing so, your essay will demonstrate OPDUL=C. Note the changes ** to OPDUL=C for the integrated essay.

ETSs Testing Method Understanding ETSs testing method for this task is the first step in writing a coherent argument-counter argument integrated essay. Read the following passages. Note: The passages have been simplified for demonstration purposes.

Personally, I believe that oil companies are a vital part of the American economy.

First, oil companies create thousands of jobs. They need geologists to find new oil reserves and engineers to bring them to market. Economists predict this segment of the job market will continue to grow.

In addition, oil companies pay taxes that build roads and bridges. Last year, big oil paid over $100 billion dollars in tax revenue. America needs this money to maintain its infrastructure.

Finally, the products oil companies make are the life-blood of many industries. Oil is vital for the transportation and plastics industries. These segments of the economy would disappear without oil.

In sum, oil companies are critical to Americas health and well being.

In the above passage, the author argues for oil companies. Now read as you listen to a lecture on the same topic. Note: On test day, you will only hear the lecture On the contrary, oil companies do more harm than good.

For starters, big oil eliminates jobs to increase profits. Last year, oil companies reduced their work force by 25% while profits were up 50% percent. This trend does not appear to be changing.

Also, oil companies avoid paying taxes by moving overseas. One company, Hamilton, moved to Dubai to reduce its U.S. corporate tax rate. How does this help our roads and bridges?

Worse, petroleum products are the number one cause of global warming. Every day cars pour billions of tons of CO2 into the atmosphere. CO2 has been directly linked to the greenhouse effect.

The evidence is clear: Oil companies do more harm than good.

In the sample lecture, the lecturer argues against oil companies. Mapped out, the argument in the reading and the counter argument in the lecture look like this.

Reading(argument) Lecture(counter argument) G = opinion G = opinion TiC = example TiC = example TiC = example TiC = example TiC = example TiC = example c = conclusion c = conclusion Where have you seen this structure before? The independent essay. As you can see, the reading and the lecture are really just two opposing, personal-opinion arguments (one written, one verbal) connected by topic.

Sometimes the reading will state the pro (positive) position and the lecture will state the anti or con (negative) position, and vice versa.

The lecture always argues against (counter argues) the reading.

The reading never counter argues the lecture.

How can I quickly know which position the reading and lecture argue?

By taking notes using G+3TiC=C. Taking notes using G+3TiC+C is the next step in writing an argument-counter argument integrated essay that proficiently demonstrates OPDUL=C.

1. Argument-Counter Argument: Step-by-Step When writing an argument-counter argument integrated essay, use G+3TiC=C and follow these six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay. You have 20 minutes. You may take notes.

Step #1 Make an G+3TiC=C note map; summarize the reading.

The integrated essay is the first task in the writing section. Before you write your integrated essay, you will hear the directions for the writing section.

Do not dismiss them. Use this time to make a note map. Write G+3TiC=C twice on paper. Put Reading above the left map and Lecture above the right map. Put point-by-point transitions under Reading. Because each point in the lecture will counter argue each point in the reading, put transitions of contrast under Lecture.

Read the Passage When the writing directions end, the reading passage will appear on your computer screen. You will have 3 minutes to read it.

Read the following passage. Read it from start to finish to understand the authors argument, and the position he/she supports (pro or con).

Music. We all love it. In fact, Im listening to music right now, music I downloaded off the internet without paying for it. Thats right. I didnt pay a nickel. Not one red cent. And for that, many would call me a criminal. Well, go right ahead. As far as Im concerned, downloading music off the internet without paying for it is not a crime. Why not?

Lets start with a little history. The internet was originally invented to be a source of free information benefiting all.

Downloading music off the internet without paying for it is a perfect example of this democratic ideal in action. In this light, I am not criminal. I am simply exercising my democratic right to move freely in the vast new democracy called cyberspace.

Now if youre like me, you love to share music with your friends by downloading it from their computers. This is not stealing music. Hardly. My friends and I are simply sharing songs. In fact, I share music with people all over the world, people I dont know and will never meet. This process is called P2P or peer-to-peer file sharing. Now think: Is sharing something you love a crime? I dont think so.

Finally, and this point I really want to stress: What I do in the privacy of my home is nobodys business but my own. Period. I dont need the government telling me what I can or cant do with my computer. The United States is a democracy not a dictatorship.

To sum up, just because I refuse to pay for downloaded music does not make me a felon. The real criminals are those in government and business determined to deny music-loving individuals their right to freedom and privacy.

Clearly, this author is pro downloading music off the internet without paying for it.

Next, summarize each part of the authors argument starting with the opinion.

Summarize the Opinion (G) To locate the authors opinion (general statement), check the introduction first. As you read, look for opinion signal words such as the following.

They will identify the start of the authors opinion.

Personally, I believe thatI feel thatI think thatIn my experienceFrom my perspectiveIn my estimationIt goes without saying thatAs far as I am concerned I posit that I contend that I reason that I postulate that, etc.

If the authors opinion is not in the introduction, check the conclusion. As you read, look for transition signal words such as the following. They will identify the start of the authors restated opinion in the conclusion.

In sumIn conclusionTo sum upAs you have seenIn the end All in allTo restateAs illustrated In closingIn the final analysisIt goes without saying thatIndeed, etc.

In the sample passage, the authors opinion is As far as Im concerned, downloading music off the internet without paying for it is not a crime.

How do we know this is the authors opinion? Because it is: 1) arguable; 2) supportable; 3) a complete sentence; 4) not a question; 5) restated in the conclusion (To sum up, just because I refuse to pay for downloaded music does not make me a felon.) Not all opinions begin with signal words. Look at following opinions.

A. As far as Im concerned, downloading music off the internet without paying for it is not a crime.

B. Downloading music off the internet without paying for it is not a crime.

Notice how opinion A uses signal words (As far as Im concerned). In contrast, opinion B does not use signal words. In this example, the authors opinion is implied or suggested (not written; not directly stated).

Next, look at the introduction from the sample reading and identify the main point. Because this is the introduction, the main point is the authors opinion. The authors opinion is identified by the signal words as far as Im concerned. The authors opinion is the beginning of his argument.

Music. We all love it. In fact, Im listening to music right now, music I downloaded off the internet without paying for it. Thats right. I didnt pay a nickel. Not one red cent. And for that, many would call me a criminal. Well, go right ahead. As far as Im concerned, downloading music off the internet without paying for it is not a crime. Why not?

Next, summarize the authors opinion beside G under Reading on your note map. Make sure you identify the cause-and-effect relationship in the opinion.

Reading G reading says downloading music off web without paying is not a crime Summarize the Body (3TiC) In the reading, the author begins his argument by stating his opinion. That means he is using deduction as a method of organization. It also means that his supporting illustrations (body paragraphs) will come right after his opinion. How can you identify each body paragraph? Look for transition signal words, such as: FirstFirst offFor startersLets start withLet me begin by sayingAlso MoreoverIn additionNextNowFurthermoreNot only that but On top of that Finally, etc.

Transition signal words will identify the start of each body paragraph.

Music. We all love it. In fact, Im listening to music right now, music I downloaded off the internet without paying for it. Thats right. I didnt pay a nickel. Not one red cent. And for that, many would call me a criminal. Well, go right ahead. As far as Im concerned, downloading music off the internet without paying for it is not a crime. Why not?

Lets start with a little history. The internet was originally invented to be a source of free information benefiting all.

Downloading music off the internet without paying for it is a perfect example of this democratic ideal in action. In this light, I am not criminal. I am simply exercising my democratic right to move freely in the vast new democracy called cyberspace.

Now if youre like me, you love to share music with your friends by downloading it from their computers. This is not stealing music. Hardly. My friends and I are simply sharing songs. In fact, I share music with people all over the world, people I dont know and will never meet. This process is called P2P or peer-to-peer file sharing. Now think: Is sharing something that you love a crime? I dont think so.

Finally, and this point I really want to stress: What I do in the privacy of my home is nobodys business but my own. Period. I dont need the government telling me what I can or cant do with my computer. The United States is a democracy not a dictatorship.

To sum up, just because I refuse to pay for downloaded music does not make me a felon. The real criminals are those in government and business determined to deny music-loving individuals their right to freedom and privacy.

Some body paragraphs will not start with a transition. In this case, use formatting to identify them. For example, look at the following body paragraphs. Notice how the first sentence of each body paragraph is indented (moved in from the margin). This formatting style signals the start of a new body paragraph when there is no transition. A new body paragraph signals the start of another supporting example (TiC), or the conclusion.

Notice how the last indentation signals the start of the conclusion. This, in turn, signals a restating of the authors opinion. Note: Body paragraphs can also be separated by a space.

After you identify the body paragraphs, summarize them as follows: Use the third person singular and the present tense (He saysShe saysIt says) Note: When taking notes, dont worry about grammar and spelling, etc. Just write.

Summarize the topic of each body paragraph after the transition (T). Next, identify the supporting illustration (i) and summarize it.

The cause - and -effect relationship in each body paragraph is the reason (main point) that supports the authors argument. Write each reason beside C.

Summarize the Conclusion (C) Often the author will restate his/her opinion in the conclusion. Opinions in the conclusion are restated using synonyms.

Next, summarize the main point in the conclusion. The main point is the authors restated opinion expressed in a cause -and- effect relationship.

Write it beside C. Use third person singular and the present tense.

C in sum author says not a felon if he doesnt pay, government and music companies deny freedom and privacy, they are the criminals, US democracy not dictatorship You now have a completed note map summarizing the main points in the reading.

Reading G reading says downloading music off web without paying is not a crime Ti first reading says internet is a democracy; downloading music is example of internet democracy C because internet is democracy, music is free Ti next friends just sharing music, example P2P sharing love for music is not stealing, not a crime Ti finally author talks about privacy, example his home what he does at home is no business of government or music companies C in sum author says he is not a felon if he doesnt pay, govt and music companies deny freedom and privacy, they are the criminals, US democracy not dictatorship Why do I need a note map for the reading if the prompt says I only have to summarize the points made in the lecture?

For three reasons.

1) You must demonstrate to the raters that you understand the argument in the reading.

2) In your essay, you will demonstrate how each point in the lecture counter argues each point in the reading.

3) Greater argument-counter argument development (OPDUL=C) = greater coherence (OPDUL=C) = a higher score.

Step #2 Listen to the lecture.

When the reading time is up, the reading passage will leave your computer screen. It will be replaced by the lecture. The lecture will be 2-3 minutes long. You cannot replay the lecture. That means you must take good notes.

An important part of taking good lecture notes is being able to predict the counter argument in the lecture.

Predicting the Counter-Argument in the Lecture The author in the sample reading argues that it is not a crime to download music and not pay for it. In contrast, the lecturer will argue the opposite (counter argue). She will say that it is a crime not to pay for downloaded music. Lets call it the black-and-white rule.

The Black-and-White Rule The black-and-white rule is simple: If the reading says Black!, the lecture will say the opposite, White! If the reading says White!, the lecture will say Black! Being able to predict the counter argument this way will help you anticipate the main points in the lecture and take notes more quickly and proficiently.

Listening Strategies For many test-takers, the hardest part of the integrated writing task is the lecture. Why? Because there are a lot of new words. Moreover, you hear the lecture only once. What should you do to take effective notes as you listen?

Do the following.

1. Look at the Lecture side of your note map.

2. Anticipate the counter argument using the black-and-white rule.

3. Listen for signals words that identify the opinion.

4. Listen for the cause-and-effect relationship in the opinion.

5. Listen for transition signal words that identify each body paragraph, its topic and supporting illustration.

6. Listen for the cause-and-effect relationship in each body paragraph.

7. Listen for transition signal words that identify the conclusion.

8. Listen for the cause-and-effect relationship in the conclusion.

As you identify the main points in the lecture, note them under Lecture on your note map. For practice, read the following lecture as you listen to it.

It happens every second of every day all over the world. One click and that new songthe one you didnt pay foris on your iPod.

You may think its legal. After all, downloading music is fast and easy, right? Think again. It goes without saying that downloading music off the web without paying for it is a crime.

I know. I know. Some will argue that Its my democratic right to download music without paying for it. Nonsense. The internet might have started out with the intention of being a democracy but, believe me, those days are long gone. The internet these days is about two things: information and money. Big money. One of the biggest money makers on the web is music, and music is protected by law. If you download U2s latest album, lets say, and you dont pay for it, then you are breaking the copyright law that says U2 owns that music. It is their property and you just stole it. If you want to listen to U2, youve got to buy it, no ifs, ands, or buts.

Also, the artist has a legal right to get paid for his or her work no matter how or where it is downloaded. How would you like it if somebody were stealing your music? This is exactly what Napster was doing. Napster was the first peer-to-peer music sharing web site. Musicians, however, took Napster to court for not paying royalties, money owed each time a song was downloaded via Napster. Napster argued that it was just helping friends share music. The courts disagreed. Napster paid a big fine and is now a pay site.

Moreover, illegally downloading music off the web is not a privacy issue. If you break the law by illegally downloading music, you are a criminal. Im sorry, but you cant have it both ways. You cant break the law and hide behind the privacy issue.

The law is clear. Criminals have no right to privacy. Period.

It bears repeating that downloading music without paying for it is a crime no matter what anyone says about the freedom of cyberspace. Just because downloading music is fast and easy doesnt mean you have the right to steal it.

Next, look at the finished note map for the lecture. Notice the cause - and-effect relationships within each part of G+3TiC=C. Note also that the test- taker writes using third person singular and the present tense.

Lecture G however lecture says downloading music without paying is a crime!

Ti however lecture says web is not democracy, all info and money, example U2 C not pay for U2? break copyright law want new U2? you must pay Ti however lecture says musicians have right to get paid example Napster C Napster said P2P sharing okay, no crime court disagreed, if artist makes music court says musicians should get paid napster now pay site Ti however lecture says it is not a privacy issue C download without paying means you are a criminal criminals have no right to privacy you cant have your cake and eat it too C however lecture says that downloading music and not paying is easy but still a crime Do I have to repeat however at the start of each body paragraph?

No. When you write a first draft, use synonyms to demonstrate language use-paraphrasing. However, when taking notes, use one transition of contrast, such as however, to save time.

Next, look at the two note maps side by side. Look at the arrows. Notice how the lecture counter-argues the reading point-by-point even in rough note form.

Step #3 Read the prompt; write a first draft.

When the lecture ends, the reading passage will return to your computer screen. The prompt will also appear.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they cast doubt on the points made in the reading.

In the above prompt, summarize means identify and generally describe. The points are the main points: the opinions, the supporting illustrations and the conclusions. Cast doubt on means to counter argue. Translated, the prompt reads like this.

Prompt Identify and generally describe the opinion (G) and the supporting illustrations (3TiC) in the lecture and show how they counter argue the opinion (G) and the supporting illustrations (3TiC) in the reading.

Organization: Point-by-Point Style When your note map is complete, you must take that information and organize it into an integrated essay that answers the prompt. One way to organize your essay is by using point-by-point style. The essay on the next page demonstrates point-by-point style. As you read, note the following.

1. A reading point (argument) comes first. It is followed by the corresponding lecture point (counter argument). This demonstrates organization and a progression of ideas (OPDUL=C).

2. The points in the lecture cast doubt on the points in the reading point-by-point. Point-by-point style demonstrates organization (OPDUL=C) which, in turn, demonstrates a progression of ideas (OPDUL=C).

3. The grammar is third person singular in the present tense (The reading saysThe lecturer says. He saysShe thinksThe author says).

This demonstrates grammatical unity (OPDUL=C).

4. Each point counter argued by the lecture begins with a transition of contrast. This demonstrates unity, both grammatical and topical (OPDUL=C).

In this essay, the test-taker does not paraphrase the reading. Dont I have to paraphrase the reading?

No. You simply have to summarize the structure of the argument in the reading. By doing so, you will identify the authors position.

Because the hardest part of this task is summarizing-paraphrasing the lecture, the raters will focus on it. A proficiently summarized and paraphrased lecture that proficiently counter argues the reading = coherence (OPDUL=C) = a higher score.

Organization: Block Style Block style is another way to organize your integrated essay. In the following example, notice how the reading is summarized first followed by the lecture.

If you use block style, use step-by-step transitions and a transition of contrast to connect the reading and the lecture.

Which method of organization is best, point-by-point or block style?

Neither. They are simply two ways to organize an integrated essay. Some test-takers prefer point-by-point. Some prefer block. Only by practicing will you know which style you prefer.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

TASK: Go back to page 118 and check the point-by-point internet music essay for coherence using the proficiency checklist.

Does this essay demonstrate organization?

The writer demonstrates organization by using point-by-point style. Yes No _ Does this essay demonstrate progression?

Because the writer is using point-by-point style, the points in the reading and in the lecture progress in parallel from general to specific.

This demonstrates progression. Yes No _ a. Do the introductions demonstrate development-summarization?

The writer has proficiently summarized the main point (the opinion) in the reading and in the lecture with no points left out. This demonstrates introduction development-summarization. Yes No _ b. Do the bodies demonstrate development-summarization?

The writer has proficiently summarized the main points (the supporting illustrations) in the reading and in the lecture with no points left out. This demonstrates body development-summarization. Yes No _ c. Do the conclusions demonstrate development-summarization?

The writer has proficiently summarized the main point (the restated opinion in the conclusion) in the reading and in the lecture with no points left out.

This demonstrates conclusion development-summarization. Yes No _ a. Does this essay demonstrate topical unity-synthesis?

Using point-by-point style, the writer demonstrates how each point in the reading and in the lecture is topically united. Because of topical unity, each point in the lecture casts doubt on each corresponding point in the reading. There are no topical digressions. This demonstrates topical unity-synthesis. Yes No _ b. Does this essay demonstrate grammatical unity-synthesis?

There are no mistakes in syntax, word choice or spelling. The transitions of contrast are correct. These elements combined demonstrate grammatical unity-synthesis. Yes No _ Does this essay demonstrate proficient language use-paraphrasing?

The writer uses synonyms to restate the main points in the lecture. This demonstrates proficient language-use paraphrasing. Yes No _ Does this essay (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Because of Organization, Progression, Development-summarization, Unity-synthesis and Language-Use-paraphrasing, the writer has proficiently summarized the points in the lecture and shown how they cast doubt on the points in the reading. This demonstrates coherence (OPDUL=C). Yes No _ According to the Integrated Essay Rating Guide (page 316), this first draft will score in the 4.0-5.0 range.

Revision Checklist: What do I need to revise?

1. If you have time, paraphrase the reading passage. This will demonstrate greater language use-paraphrasing (OPDUL=C).

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Paraphrasing To paraphrase means to restate using synonyms. When you paraphrase, write objectively. Use third person singular and the present tense, for example: 1. original The author of the reading states that downloading music off the internet without paying for it is not a crime.

paraphrase The reading says that it is not a crime to download music off the web and not pay for it.

First, the reading says that the internet was originally invented 2. original to be a source of free information. Downloading music without paying for it is an example of this democratic ideal in action.

paraphrase First, the reading states that the internet is a democracy.

Therefore, everything on the internet is free, including music.

Next, the reading states that downloading music from a friends 3. original computer is not stealing. It is peer-to-peer file sharing. File sharing, he says, is not a crime.

paraphrase Next, the reading claims that P2P file sharing isnt a crime.

Youre simply sharing what you love: music.

Finally, the author says that what he does in the privacy of his 4. original own home is no business of the government or the record companies. The US is a democracy not a dictatorship.

Finally, the author of the reading believes that this is a privacy paraphrase issue. Record companies and the government cant tell him what he can or cant do.

In sum, the reading states that downloading music off the 5. original internet without paying for it is not a crime. The real criminals are the government and record companies trying to take away peoples freedom and privacy.

In conclusion, the reading claims that downloading internet paraphrase music without paying for it isnt a crime. The true criminals are the government and the music industry taking away peoples right to freedom and privacy.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

After you revise your essay, submit it.

Look at the submitted essay below. Note the space between each point. This makes it easier to read and rate. Note also that the reading has been paraphrased.

The reading says that it is not a crime to download music off the web and not pay for it.

However, the lecturer believes its a crime.

First, the reading states that the internet is a democracy. Therefore, everything on the internet is free, including music. In contrast, the lecturer states that copyright laws protect music. If you dont pay for U2s latest album, youre breaking the law.

Next, the reading claims that P2P file sharing isnt a crime. Youre simply sharing what you love: music. However, the lecturer says that musicians should get paid. For example, Napster, a P2P site, didnt pay musicians. Napster said file sharing wasnt a crime. The court disagreed and fined Napster for not paying.

Finally, the author of the reading believes that this is a privacy issue. Record companies and the government cant tell him what to do.

In contrast, the lecturer believes that if you steal music, you are a thief therefore you have no privacy. The law is black and white.

You cant have your cake and eat it too.

In conclusion, the reading claims that downloading internet music without paying for it isnt a crime. The true criminals are the government and the music industry taking away peoples right to freedom and privacy.

However, the lecturer asserts that ripping music off the web is a crime.

Mapped out, you can see how G+3TiC=C gives the writing raters what they are trained to look for: a coherent integrated essay that demonstrates OPDUL=C. Note: Transitions (T) are in bold, supporting illustrations (i) in italics, the opinions (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

How long should my integrated essay be?

ETS says: An effective [integrated essay] would be 150-225 words.

How many words is the internet music integrated essay above?

225 words.

The Word Counter When you write your integrated essay, you will see a word counter on your computer screen. Ignore it. You are not counting words. You are writing an integrated essay that demonstrates how the lecture counter argues the reading. Do so using G+3TiC=C and OPDUL=C.

2. Argument-Counter Argument: Step-by-Step Lets work through another argument-counter argument integrated essay using G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Make an G+3TiC=C note map; summarize the reading.

Read the Passage When the writing instructions end, the reading passage will appear on your computer screen. You will have 3 minutes to read and summarize it.

Next, read the passage on the next page to get an understanding of the authors argument.

In this article, I will take a closer look at teleconferencing. For starters, perhaps the greatest benefit of teleconferencing is convenience. No longer do business people have to fly around the world to meet face-to-face with customers or colleagues.

Now they can simply dial into a conference line or click open a web cam and theyre ready to do business. Not only that, but with teleconferencing you can schedule meetings all day long from the comfort of your office or home. Never has there been a more convenient way to do business.

Another big advantage is the savings. These days, with the average business class airline ticket costing well over four thousand dollarsnot to mention the cost of hotels, meals and transportationthe cost saving advantages of teleconferencing are enormous. According to Economy Magazine, the average blue chip company saved over $40 million dollars last year by cutting back on travel costs. Now ask yourself: Whats better, spending time and money getting from point A to point Band feeling exhausted in the processor simply picking up the phone and using same-time email? The choice is obvious.

Teleconferencing also allows business people from a wide variety of cultures to come together to solve time-sensitive problems. For example, if youre working towards a deadline, and you dont have a solution to your problem, one of your colleagues in Brazil or Spain might have the solution you are looking for. By sharing experiences, business people can, via teleconferencing, offer insights and solutions to problems by simply picking up the phone or turning on a web cam.

Summarize the Opinion (G) In this reading passage, notice how the author does not state an opinion at the start or in the conclusion. There are simply three body paragraphs.

Isnt the first sentence an opinion?

No. The author is simply announcing the topic he/she will talk about, specifically teleconferencing. This is a fact therefore not arguable.

The reading passage does not always state a direct opinion in the introduction or in the conclusion. A direct opinion is stated in writing.

Often, the opinion/conclusion is implied (not direct/not written), as it is in this passage.

What if there is no opinion in the introduction or in the conclusion?

How do I know what the authors opinion is?

Look at the graphic below. Notice how the author describes one advantage of teleconferencing in each body paragraph.

From the advantages, you can infer (conclude) what the authors opinion is.

After you identify the opinion, summarize it beside G under Reading. Write it as a cause- and -effect relationship.

Reading G the reading says teleconferencing has advantages Summarize the Body (3TiC) When summarizing the body, start by looking for signals words that identify the start of each body paragraph. When you identify each body paragraph, summarize it. Remember to state the cause-and-effect relationship in the concluding sentences of each of your body paragraphs (TiC).

Ti first, convenience, example meetings, no need to travel use phone, web cam instead C teleconferencing means no more meetings Ti next save $$$, example Economy Magazine says companies saved $40 million in travel costs C teleconferencing means you can save $$$ Ti finally, problem solving, example you have a problem, call colleagues around world, share experience/solutions C teleconferencing is good for solving time-sensitive problems Summarize the Conclusion (C) When summarizing the conclusion, look for the authors restated opinion.

This reading passage does not have a conclusion. What should I do?

Restate the authors inferred opinion.

C the reading says teleconferencing has advantages You now have a complete note map for the reading passage.

Reading G the reading says teleconferencing has advantages Ti first, convenience, example meetings, no need to travel use phone, web cam instead C teleconferencing means no more meetings Ti next savings, example Economy Magazine says companies saved $40 million travel costs C teleconferencing means you can save $$$ Ti finally, problem solving, example you have a problem, cal colleagues around world, share experience/solutions C teleconferencing is good for solving time sensitive problems C the reading says teleconferencing has advantages Step #2 Listen to the lecture; summarize it.

When the reading time is up, the reading passage will leave the screen. It will be replaced by the lecture. As you listen: 1. Look at the Lecture side of your note map.

2. Anticipate the counter argument using the black-and-white rule.

3. Listen for signal words that identify the opinion, the body paragraphs and the conclusion. Note the cause-and-effect relationship in each.

TASK: Take notes as you listen to a lecture on teleconferencing.

Step #3 Read the prompt; write a first draft.

When the lecture ends, it will leave your computer screen. The reading passage will return. You will also see the prompt.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they cast doubt on the points made in the reading.

TASK: Using the reading notes already illustrated and your lecture notes, write a first draft using either point-by-point or block style. Type your essay. Dont time yourself. Just write. Replay the lecture as needed for practice.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Check your first draft for coherence using the Integrated Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 314.

Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

TASK: Rate your teleconferencing essay using the Integrated Essay Rating Guide on page 316.

Three Common Problems Check the following integrated essay for proficiency using OPDUL=C.

What problems can you identify?

He argues that zoos are a bad investment.

In addition, she claims that zoos have value.

First, he says that zoos are a waste of money. They use money that could help poor neighborhoods.

Moreover, she argues against this.

Next, he claims that zoos are not good for animals. He uses many clear examples, such as small cages.

Also, she argues that he is totally wrong about that.

Finally, he contends that zoos take up valuable land.

In addition, she gets really angry about that.

In sum, he argues that zoos are a waste of money.

In conclusion, she disagrees.

According to OPDUL=C, this essay demonstrates: A lack of language use-paraphrasing (OPDUL=C), specifically word choice.

A lack of unity-synthesis (OPDUL=C), specifically topical unity.

A lack of development-summarization (OPDUL=C) of the introductions, the bodies and the conclusions.

Combined, these three problem areas result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C). Lets analyze each so you can avoid these mistakes on test day.

1 Lack of Language Use-Paraphrasing Look at the sample essay once again. Note he and she. Because he and she are not identified, we do not know who represents the reading and who represents the lecture. This results in a lack of language-use paraphrasing, specifically word choice (OPDUL=C), and a lack of topical unity-synthesis (OPDUL=C).

He argues that zoos are a bad investment.

In addition, she claims that zoos have value.

First, he says that zoos are a waste of money. They use money that could help poor neighborhoods.

Moreover, she argues against this.

Next, he claims that zoos are not good for animals. He uses many clear examples, such as small cages.

Also, she argues that he is totally wrong about that.

Finally, he contends that zoos take up valuable land.

In addition, she gets really angry about that.

In sum, he argues that zoos are a waste money.

In conclusion, she disagrees.

Next, look at how he and she have been replaced by the reading and the lecturer.

The reading argues that zoos are a bad investment.

In addition, the lecturer claims that zoos have value.

First, the reading says that zoos are a waste of money. They use money that could help poor neighborhoods.

Moreover, the lecturer argues against this.

Next, the reading claims that zoos are not good for animals. The reading uses many clear examples, such as small cages. Also, the professor in the lecture argues that the reading is totally wrong about that.

Finally, the reading contends that zoos take up valuable land. In addition, the lecturer gets really angry about that.

In sum, the reading argues that zoos are a waste money.

In conclusion, the lecturer disagrees.

2 Lack of Unity-Synthesis Note the transitions in the sample essay below. They are transitions of addition (adding information). They should be transitions of contrast. This demonstrates a lack of proficient language use-paraphrasing, specifically word choice (OPDUL=C), and a lack of unity-synthesis, both grammatical and topical (OPDUL=C).

The reading argues that zoos are a bad investment.

In addition, the lecturer claims that zoos have value.

First, the reading says that zoos are a waste of money. They use money that could help poor neighborhoods.

Moreover, the lecturer argues against this.

Next, the reading claims that zoos are not good for animals. The reading uses many clear examples, such as small cages. Also, the professor in the lecture argues that the reading is totally wrong about that.

Finally, the reading contends that zoos take up valuable land.

In addition, the lecturer gets really angry about that.

In sum, the reading argues that zoos are a waste of money.

In conclusion, the lecturer disagrees.

Next, look at how the writer is now using transitions of contrast. This demonstrate unity-synthesis and language use-paraphrasing and (OPDUL=C).

The reading argues that zoos are a bad investment.

However, the lecturer claims that zoos have value.

First, the reading says that zoos are a waste of money. They use money that could help poor neighborhoods.

Conversely, the lecture argues against this.

Next, the reading claims that zoos are not good for animals. The reading uses many clear examples, such as small cages.

On the contrary, the professor in the lecture argues that the reading is totally wrong about that.

Finally, the reading contends that zoos take up valuable land.

In contrast, the lecturer gets really angry about that.

In sum, the reading argues that zoos are a waste of money.

Countering that, the lecturer disagrees.

3 Lack of Development-Summarization When summarizing the main points in the reading and in the lecture, make sure that you identify and describe the cause-and- effect relationship in the opinions, the body paragraphs and the conclusions. The cause-and- effect relationships are the reasons each arguer gives to defend his or her position.

The reading argues that zoos are a bad investment.

However, the lecturer claims that zoos have value.

First, the reading says that zoos use money that could help poor neighborhoods. For example, in Washington DC, the zoo got more tax money than the public schools. As a result, many schools closed but the zoo got a new elephant exhibit. Conversely, the lecturer argues that the money for the elephant exhibit was donations. She also says that the Washington DC school problem is due to bad government not a lack of tax money.

Next, the reading claims that zoos are not good for animals like the panda. It cannot breed in captivity.

The reading says the panda would do better in the wild.

On the contrary, the professor in the lecture argues that the pandas habitat is disappearing. Returning pandas to the wild is not an option.

Finally, the reading contends that zoos take up valuable land that could be used to build houses.

This would create jobs.

In contrast, the lecturer argues that building houses is a short-term solution to job creation. Building zoos would create permanent jobs.

In sum, the reading argues that zoos are not a good investment.

Countering that, the lecturer claims that we need zoos to save wild animals from extinction. Building zoos is how we can invest in the environment.

Lack of development-summarization (OPDUL=C), especially in the body paragraphs, is a big reason why integrated essays receive a low score.

Mapped out, you can see how G+3TiC=C gives the writing raters what they are trained to look for: a coherent integrated essay that demonstrates OPDUL=C. Transitions (T) are in bold, supporting illustrations (i) in italics, the opinions (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

ETS says: An effective [integrated essay] would be 150-225 words.

How many words is the integrated essay above?

225 words.

TASK: Rate the zoo essay above using the Integrated Essay Rating Guide on page 316. Compare your rating to the one on page 339.

Writing Practice TASK: For each of the following tasks, use G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your argument-counter argument integrated essay. Check each for proficiency using the Integrated Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 314. Rate each using the Integrated Essay Rating Guide on page 316.

Task #1 Directions: Read the following passage. You have 3 minutes.

Many of my colleagues will disagree, but I believe that the time is right to legalize marijuana. Yes, this is a hot-button issue; however, there are good reasons why the growing and selling of marijuana should no longer be a criminal offense in the United States.

First, the federal government needs money. A lot of money.

The federal deficit is now running into the trillions. Where is the tax money going to come from to pay off this massive debt?

Marijuana. According to Business Week Magazine, if the cost of retailing and distributing marijuana is the same for cigarettes, then the taxes from marijuana would be approximately $40 to $100 billion per year. As you can see, marijuana would be an excellent source of tax revenue to help pay off the national debt.

A new source of tax revenue is not the only benefit of legalizing marijuana. Once marijuana is legalized, the crime rate will dramatically drop. By reducing marijuana related-crimes, state and national police agencies, for example, will be able to focus their limited resources on other crimes such as border security and terrorism. Lets face it, the so-called War on Drugs has been a dismal failure. Isnt it time to wake up to the fact that marijuana is here to stay?

Finally, there is the issue of choice. If I have the right to drink alcohol and smoke cigarettes, why shouldnt I have the right to smoke marijuana? The Constitution clearly states that every American has the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. According to the Constitution, I have the right to enjoy marijuana just like many enjoy alcohol and tobacco. And if marijuana kills me, just like alcohol and tobacco kill millions every year, that is my right and my choice too. By legalizing marijuana, this double standard will end.

Now listen to a lecture on the same topic.

After listening to the lecture, read the prompt.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they cast doubt on the points made in the reading.

TASK: You have 20 minutes to write your response.

Task #2 Directions: Read the following passage. You have 3 minutes.

In the late eighteenth century, just after the revolution, a young America was looking for heroes it could call its own. They found one in Christopher Columbus. By sailing to the New World, Columbus left the old world behind, a world dominated by kings and nobles who controlled the land. By leaving the old in search of the new, Columbus symbolized Americas determination to break free of Britain and King George the Third and establish a new republic free of old world tyranny and enslavement.

Later, in the early nineteenth century, Americans viewed Columbus as the symbol of progress. Columbus was seen as a free man, a pioneer seeking new lands and new fortunes, a fearless adventurer much like the tens of thousands of Americans streaming west, risking their lives seeking fortune in new, unexplored territories west of the Mississippi. Americans were indeed bold and courageous. They liked their heroes the same way. Columbus fit the mold perfectly.

America of today, much like America of the past, is a country of contrasts and fragmentation. Political parties and religions proclaim their individual messages while regional boundaries divide us between north and south, east and west. Yet what brings us together as Americans is the name Christopher Columbus.

Now, and in the past, we see in Columbus a man who embodies the spirit of freedom in which the right to pursue life, liberty and happiness is alive and well.

Now you can see why Americans consider Columbus to be one of our nations founding fathers, right up there with George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. Next Columbus Day, spend some time thinking about what Christopher Columbus means to America.

Now listen to a lecture on the same topic.

After listening to the lecture, read the prompt.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they cast doubt on the points made in the reading.

TASK: You have 20 minutes to write your response.

Task #3 Directions: Read the following passage. You have 3 minutes.

A rising trend in education is online schools. Google online schools and you will get thousands of hits with schools offering every type of diploma and degree. But is an online education all its cracked up to be? Let the facts speak for themselves.

One of the big attractions of enrolling in an online school is convenience. However, many distance learners fall into the trap of thinking that they can fit an online course into their schedules.

Just log on after work or on the weekend, and the homework gets done. If only it were so easy. A flexible schedule takes a lot of discipline, especially if youre a working parent with a family to look after. In fact, the drop out rate for e-courses is very high. A report in the Chronicle of Higher Education found that drop out rates range from 20-50% for distance learners as compared to 10-20% for their face-to-face counterparts. Obviously, flexibility is not always a good thing.

Another issue is credibility. Think about it: Do you want a degree from an internet school nobodys heard of, or do you want a degree from a brick-and-mortar university? Many students still want the name of an established academic institution on their resume. One unfortunate student, however, enrolled in an online school only to graduate and learn that the school had a bad reputation among Human Resource professionals. Who looks at your resume first? The people in Human Resources.

Then there is the issue of personal interaction. Part of an on-campus education is to meet face-to-face with your professors and peers. Such interaction is a vital part of the educational process yet it has been eliminated with the rise of e-courses. If you are the type of student who needs regular, face-to-face student-teacher interaction, then an e-course would not be a wise investment.

Now listen to a lecture on the same topic.

After listening to the lecture, read the prompt.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they cast doubt on the points made in the reading.

TASK: You have 20 minutes to write your response.

Task #4 Directions: Read the following passage. You have 3 minutes.

Organic food is very trendy these days. Everywhere you go, people are jumping on the organic bandwagon. I used to be organic. I did. But I kicked the habit. Believe me, Id bought all the arguments, like the one that says that organic food is priced the same as non organic. Right. Let me give you an example of just how wrong that argument is. At my local grocery store, a small box of organic strawberries costs four dollars. Four dollars for maybe twelve strawberries! I can buy twice that many non organic strawberries for half that price. The fact is organic fruits and vegetables are a good forty to fifty percent more expensive than non organic. Imagine trying to feed a family of four at those prices. Youd have to take out a bank loan every time you went shopping.

Another thing about organic is that its not always easy to get.

At my local grocery store, I can buy organic fruit and vegetables no problem, but not organic rice or grains like barley and wheat.

If I want organic rice, I have to drive ten miles across town through heavy traffic to a health food store that doesnt take credit cards. Then I have drive all the way back home. All that for five pounds of rice. Believe me, its easier just to grab a bag of good old non organic rice at my local grocery store.

And what about taste? Does my family even know the difference between organic and non organic? No. A good example is organic milk. I used to buy it all the time but I stopped because it was more expensive than non organic. Did my husband and kids miss the organic milk? Did they suddenly notice a taste change from organic to non organic milk? Not at all. Food for thought next time you wander through the organic section of your local grocery store.

Now listen to a lecture on the same topic.

After listening to the lecture, read the prompt.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they cast doubt on the points made in the reading.

TASK: You have 20 minutes to write your response.

Task #5 Directions: Read the following passage. You have 3 minutes.

Let me cut to the chase. We need to fund a new era in space exploration for the benefit of science and for all mankind.

For starters, history has shown that there is no better way to develop new technology than by exploring space. All you need to do is look around to realize the benefits that have come from exploring space: TV satellite dishes, medical imaging, edible toothpaste, smoke detectors, ski boots, invisible braces and joystick controllers. And thats just the start. That computer you are using? Why is it so small? Because in the early days of space exploration, miniaturization was priority number one. Smaller meant less weight which meant less fuel needed to launch rockets into space. As you can see, space exploration has inspired great minds to develop new ideas not only for space but for the benefit of all mankind.

Another benefit would be the boom in space travel. With the space shuttle making regular flights into earth orbit, theres no reason why private companies cant do the same. Yes, its expensive now but in the near future, with more companies coming online, costs will come down substantially. Imagine vacationing on the moon. You could visit all the original Apollo landing sites and watch earth rise and earth set. Honeymooners will love it.

The most pressing reason for why we should explore space is to discover who is really out there. If you are like me, you have no doubt that life exists on other planets. The only question is on which planets. A space program dedicated to searching out new life forms would go a long way in solving the mystery. Think of the benefits of encountering a new species of being. We would benefit from their science and, more importantly, finally prove that we are not alone after all.

Now listen to a lecture on the same topic.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they cast doubt on the points made in the reading.

TASK: You have 20 minutes to write your response.

Show-Support Essay On test day, expect to write an argument counter-argument essay. However, you must be prepared to write a show-support integrated essay. A show- support integrated essay is a fact-based argument. Look at the following show-support prompt.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they add to and support the information in the reading.

For this task, you must: take notes as you read and listen; summarize the main points in the reading and in the lecture; synthesize the main points in the reading and in the lecture; paraphrase the main points in the reading and in the lecture; demonstrate how the lecture adds to and supports the reading.

ETSs Testing Method Understanding the testing method ETS uses for this task is the first step in writing a coherent, show-support integrated essay. Start by reading the passage on the next page. You have 3 minutes.

Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active. Animals, such as horses, elephants and most birds, are said to be diurnal because they are active during the day and rest at night. Humans by far are the largest segment of this group. The majority of us work during the day and sleep at night. Those animals that are active at dawn and dusk are said to be crepuscular.

Beetles, skunks and rabbits fall into this category. The third group are those animals that sleep during the day and are active at night.

They are called nocturnal. A good example is the bat. Bats have highly developed eyesight and hearing, and an excellent sense of smell. This helps them avoid predators and locate food. Being nocturnal also helps them avoid high temperatures during the day, especially in deserts where temperatures can reach well over one hundred degrees. Also, because it is cooler at night, bats and other nocturnal animals use less energy. This, in turn, means they retain more body water essential for survival.

Notice how the reading is a general introduction to animal behavior. Note also that there is no opinion; however, there is a premise in the first (topic) sentence: Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active. The premise is a general fact. It is also the main topic of the reading.

Now read as you listen to a lecture on the same topic. As you read listen, look for supporting illustrations (3TiC).

Good afternoon. In this lecture, well focus on a common nocturnal animal, the bat. There are two types of bat: micro bats, or true bats, and mega bats, also called fruit bats. Lets start with mega bats. Size wise, mega bats are from two to sixteen inches in length. Mega bats have extremely sensitive sight and smell. This helps them locate the flowers and fruit upon which they feed. It is while eating that mega bats play a important role in the distribution of plants. Like bees, mega bats serve as pollinators. When they lick nectar or eat flowers, their bodies become covered in pollen which they, in turn, carry to other trees and plants thereby acting as pollinators. In fact, many of the fruits and vegetables on our tables, such as bananas and peaches, would not be there if mega bats did not pollinate plants and trees.

Next are micro bats. As the name implies, micro bats are quite small, about the size of a mouse. To find food, micro bats use echolocation, high frequency sounds they bounce off insects. The most common micro bat is the vesper or evening bat. Like mega bats, micro bats play an important role in the environment. The average vesper bat, for example, can eat one thousand mosquitoes in one night. By doing so, they control the mosquito population.

In the lecture, two examples of a nocturnal animal are developed: mega bats and micro bats. These examples add to and support (develop) the premise in the reading: Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active.

Mapped out, you can see how the reading and the lecture are organized.

Notice that the premise in the sample reading introduces a general description of animal classification.

Are there always two lecture examples (2TiC) to add and support the reading?

No. Sometimes there is one well-developed example (ITiC). Sometimes there are two examples (2TiC). Sometimes there are three (3TiC). Be prepared for three examples.

The lecture examples (specific) always add to and support the reading (general).

Show Support: Step-by-Step When writing a show-support integrated essay, use G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Make a G+3TiC=C note map; include transitions of addition.

Because the reading is a general description of the main topic, summarize it first. Because the lecture will add to and support the reading with specific examples, use transitions of addition in the lecture.

Read the Passage You will have 3 minutes to read the passage. Read it twice. Read first for a general understanding. The second time look for signal words that identify the premise.

Remember: The premise is the main topic.

definition define classify classificationprocess historical figure historical moment idea concept theory design These signal words will identify the premise, a topic TOEFL will teach you about.

TOEFL as Teacher TOEFL realizes that you have probably never heard about the reading topic in English before. Therefore, TOEFL will teach you about it. TOEFL teaches you by giving you a premise (main topic) followed by a general description of the premise. In other words, the reading is both a teaching and a testing tool. To teach you, TOEFL will define the premise using a definition or a description of a person, place or thing. The premise might also be defined by a process, a concept, a natural phenomena, a social or psychological theory, or an historical moment or person. The premise might also be a classification, as is the sample below.

Because the reading passage is so short, the premise will often be in the topic (first) sentence.

Read the sample passage. Notice how the premise is stated in the first sentence and is identified by the signal words can be classified.

Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active. Animals, such as horses, elephants and most birds, are said to be diurnal because they are active during the day and rest at night. Humans by far are the largest segment of this group. The majority of us work during the day and sleep at night. Those animals that are active at dawn and dusk are said to be crepuscular. Beetles, skunks and rabbits fall into this category. The third group are those animals that sleep during the day and are active at night. They are called nocturnal. A good example is the bat. Bats have highly developed eyesight and hearing, and an excellent sense of smell. This helps them avoid predators and locate food. Being nocturnal also helps them avoid high temperatures during the day, especially in deserts where temperatures can reach well over one hundred degrees. Also, because it is cooler at night, bats and other nocturnal animals use less energy. This, in turn, means they retain more body water essential for survival.

As you read the passage, summarize it under Reading on your note map. To summarize means to identify and generally describe the main points. In the reading, the main points are the premise and a general description of the premise.

Reading G reading classifies animal behavior according to time of day day is diurnal - eat during day, sleep at night, humans horses, elephants twilight is crepuscular - active dawn and dusk, beetles, rabbits, skunks night is nocturnal - sleep during day, active at night The reading passage will contain a lot of information. Most of it is distractor (details that are not important in your summary). Your job is to identify and summarize the premise. Do not summarize every sentence. You will waste time. You only have 20 minutes.

Step #2 Listen to the lecture.

When the reading time is up, the passage will leave your screen. It will be replaced by the lecture. The lecture will be 2-3 minutes long. As you listen to the sample lecture (CD Track #9), look at the lecture notes below. Note the how each example of a bat is developed. Note also the cause-and- effect relationship in the concluding sentence of each body paragraph (C). Note also how the conclusion (C) restates the task described in the prompt (see the prompt on the next page).

Step #3 Read the prompt; write a first draft.

When the lecture ends, the reading passage will return to your computer screen. The prompt will also appear.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they add to and support the information in the reading.

When writing a first draft, summarize the reading first, then the lecture. By doing so, you are using block style as a method of organization.

How long should my show-support integrated essay be?

ETS says: An effective [integrated essay] would be 150-225 words.

How many words is the show-support essay above?

212.

Step #4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Does this essay demonstrate organization?

This essay has a premise, a body and a conclusion. This demonstrates block-style organization. Yes No _ Does this essay demonstrate progression?

The writer develops the premised followed by supporting illustrations in the body. After the body, there is a conclusion stating how the main points in the lecture add to and support the reading. This demonstrates progression (general-specific). Yes No _ a. Does the introduction demonstrate development-summarization?

The writer identifies and summarizes the premise in the reading with no points left out. This demonstrates introduction development-summarization. Yes No _ b. Does the body demonstrate development-summarization?

The writer identifies and summarizes the supporting illustrations in the lecture with no points left out. This demonstrates body development-summarization. Yes No _ c. Does the conclusion demonstrate development-summarization?

The conclusion states how the main points in the lecture add to and support the general topic in the reading. This demonstrates conclusion development-summarization. Yes No _ a. Does this essay demonstrate topical unity-synthesis?

The writer focuses on how animals are classified by behavior with no topical digressions. This demonstrates topical unity-synthesis. Yes No _ b. Does this essay demonstrate grammatical unity-synthesis?

There are no mistakes in syntax. The transitions are correct. These elements combined demonstrate grammatical unity-synthesis. Yes No _ Does this essay demonstrate proficient language use-paraphrasing?

There are no mistakes in word choice or spelling. The writer paraphrases the reading and the lecture. This demonstrates proficient language use-paraphrasing. Yes No _ Does this essay (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Because of organization, Progression, Development-summarization, Unity -synthesis and Language Use-paraphrasing, this essay proficiently demonstrates how the main points in the lecture add to and support the reading. This demonstrates coherence (OPDUL=C). Yes No _ Step #5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Step #6 Submit your essay.

The reading classifies animal behavior three ways: diurnal, crepuscular and nocturnal. Diurnal animals are active during the day and sleep at night. Crepuscular animals are active at dawn and dusk. Nocturnal animals hunt at night and rest during the day. An example of a nocturnal animal is the bat.

The lecture develops the example of the bat. First, there are mega bats or fruit bats. They live in Africa, Asia and Oceania and eat fruit and flowers which they locate by smell and with their excellent eyesight. As they eat, seeds from the fruit fall to the forest floor and new trees grow. This is good for the environment because new trees replace the old ones. Mega bats also pollinate. When they eat a flower, their bodies get covered with pollen which they carry to other flowers. The lecture says without mega bats pollinating, we would have no peaches or bananas.

Next the lecture talks about micro bats or small bats. Micro bats use echolocation to find insects to eat. Like mega bats, micro bats are also good for the environment. In one night, a micro bat called the vesper bat can eat approximately 1,000 mosquitoes. By doing so, they control the mosquito population.

These examples add to and support the reading.

Words: 212 TASK: Rate the show-support essay above using the Integrated Essay Rating Guide on page 316. Compare your rating to the one on page 339.

Writing Practice TASK: For each of the following tasks, use G+3TiC=C and the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your show-support integrated essay. Check each for proficiency using the Integrated Essay Proficiency Checklist on page 314. Rate each using the Integrated Essay Rating Guide on page 316.

Task #1 Directions: Read the following passage. You have 3 minutes.

The American Civil War was fought between the northern and the southern states from 1861 to 1865. It was a bloody war. A total of 618,000 soldiers died. More soldiers died in the American Civil War than in all of Americas wars combined, from the Revolutionary War right on up to the Iraq War. The Civil War started when the South withdrew from the Union. The South accused the federal government of being a dictatorship intent on denying the southern states the right to set their own laws, particularly in regard to the right to own slaves. The first shot of the Civil War was fired at the supply ship Star of the West on January 10, 1861 when it was trying to resupply the Union Fort Sumter in Charleston harbor, South Carolina. The last shot of the war, however, is in dispute. Some think it was fired by a rebel soldier on May 6, 1865 in White Sulphur Springs, North Carolina while others contend that it was fired by the CSS Shenandoah, a southern ship firing upon Union whalers in Alaska on June 28, 1865. Historians agree that the actual fighting of the war ended when Robert E. Lee surrendered to General Grant at Appomattox Courthouse, April 9, 1865.

Now listen to a lecture on the same topic.

After you listen to the lecture, read the prompt.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they add to and support the information in the reading.

TASK: You have 20 minutes to write your response.

Task #2 Directions: Read the following passage. You have 3 minutes.

Seamounts are undersea mountains rising off the ocean floor.

Seamounts are not islands because their highest points do not break through the oceans surface. Many seamounts are extinct volcanoes with distinct cone shapes. Seamounts range from a height of 1,000 meters to over 4,000 meters. Even the peak of the highest seamount is found deep below the surface of the water. Around the world, there are approximately 100,000 seamounts, most of which have not been charted. Approximately half of the worlds seamounts are found in the Pacific Ocean. Because seamounts are so big, they affect the flow of ocean currents. Currents flowing up from the ocean floor bring life-sustaining nutrients into the photosynthetic zone, a place where sunlight and carbon dioxide are converted into food energy for plants and other organisms. As a result, seamounts have great biodiversity. Moreover, because of the nutrient rich waters around seamounts, a great variety of plants and fish make seamounts their home. Some of these fish are endemic species, fish that are found only around seamounts. Such biodiversity, in turn, attracts larger prey fish, such as sharks and tuna, as well as marine mammals, such as seals. It also attracts commercial fishing.

Now listen to a lecture on the same topic.

After you listen to the lecture, read the prompt Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they add to and support the information in the reading.

TASK: You have 20 minutes to write your response.

Emergency Integrated Essay What if you cant write an integrated essay? What if you blank out? What should you do? Follow these six steps and write an emergency integrated essay.

Note: The emergency integrated essay is for the argument-counter argument essay only. Expect to write an argument-counter argument essay on test day.

1. Emergency Integrated Essay: Step-by-Step When writing an emergency integrated essay, use G+3TiC=C and follow the six steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your essay.

Step #1 Make a G+3TiC=C note map; include transitions.

When writing an emergency integrated essay, use block style. Notice the transition of contrast under Lecture. After you make a note map, read the passage twice. Under Reading, summarize the authors opinion, the supporting illustrations and the conclusion.

Step #2 Listen to the lecture.

1. Predict the counter argument using the black-and-white rule.

2. On your note map under Lecture, summarize the lecturers opinion, supporting illustrations and conclusion.

Step #3 Read the prompt; write a first draft.

When the lecture ends, the reading passage will return to your screen. Using your notes, summarize as much of the reading and the lecture as you can using block style. If your lecture notes are incomplete, use the black-and-white rule. Look at each reading point, then state the opposite in the corresponding lecture point.

Using the black-and-white rule, state the opposite of the reading opinion and the opposite of the reading conclusion in your lecture summary.

Next, look at each supporting illustration (3TiC) in the reading. Using the black-and-white rule, state the opposite point in your lecture summary.

Step # 4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

Step # 5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

Step # 6 Submit your essay.

2. Emergency Integrated Essay: Step-by-Step You can also write an emergency integrated essay by simply summarizing and paraphrasing the main points in the lecture, for example: The lecturer believes that not paying for downloaded music is a crime.

First, the lecturer states that copyright laws protect music. If you dont pay for U2s latest album, youre breaking the law.

Next, the lecturer says that musicians should get paid.

For example, Napster, a P2P site, didnt pay musicians.

Napster said that file sharing wasnt a crime. The court disagreed and fined Napster for not paying.

Finally, the lecturer believes that if you steal music, you are a thief therefore you have no privacy. The law is black and white. You cant have your cake and eat it too.

In conclusion, the lecturer asserts that ripping music off the web is a crime.

For those reasons, the lecture casts doubt on the reading.

Words: 127 In the above essay, notice how the last sentence is a conclusion which topically unites the lecture and the reading (OPDUL=C), and answers the prompt.

The raters will focus on how proficiently you summarize and paraphrase the main points in the lecture.

What Have You Learned?

In this chapter, you learned how to write and revise a variety of integrated essays using G+3TiC=C and the six steps. By doing so, you can demonstrate OPDUL=C in an integrated essay.

#1 Make a G+3TiC=C note map; summarize the reading (3 mins).

#2 Listen to the lecture; summarize it (2-3 minutes).

#3 Read the prompt; write a first draft (20 minutes).

#4 Check your first draft for Coherence using OPDUL=C.

#5 Revise your first draft using your revision checklist.

#6 Submit your essay.

Test-takers who get high integrated essay scores have practiced writing a lot.

Notes Speaking Task One Independent Task: Single-Question Prompt For this task, you will develop and verbally deliver a personal-opinion argument in 45 seconds. The task order follows.

Prompt Types For this task, you will answer a single-question prompt, for example: Prompt Why do people travel? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

Where have you seen single-question prompts before? The independent essay. In fact, independent Speaking Task #1 is really just a mini independent essay. However, instead of developing your argument in writing, you will develop it in 15 seconds, then deliver it verbally in 45 seconds.

How can you develop and deliver a mini verbal independent essay in 60 seconds? By changing G+3TiC=C to G+TiC=C.

G+TiC=C will help you give the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: an independent spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C.

OPDUL=C Note the changes to OPDUL=C under Language Use. For this task, the raters will also rate your * Delivery.

Delivery When you speak, the speaking raters will measure the proficiency of your delivery in these three areas: fluency, automaticity and pronunciation.

Fluency Fluency means how easily (naturally) you speak. Do you speak smoothly and confidently, or do you hesitate and speak in fragments?

Automaticity Automaticity means how fast you think and speak.

Do you pause to translate, or do you think and speak automatically without pausing to translate?

Pronunciation Pronunciation means how proficiently you produce the sound of English words. Do you stress the right syllables with accurate intonation and volume, or not?

Speaking Subjectively Speaking subjectively means speaking about yourself. You are the subject, for example: Hi, my name is Lilliana. Im an architect from Buenos Aries, Argentina. Last year, I graduated from university. Now, Im working for an architect in Barcelona, Spain.

I have been so busy, but I love it. Its like a dream come true. Next year, I will return to Argentina and start my own business.

Notice how Lilliana is speaking about herself using the first person singular (I am I graduated I have beenI will return). Because Lilliana is speaking subjectively, she is confident about what she is saying. She is confident because when she talks about herself, she makes fewer mistakes even when using idioms (Its like a dream come true!).

Fewer mistakes = greater language use proficiency = greater coherence = a higher score.

Basic Response For a basic spoken response, you must be able to organize your personal-opinion argument quickly and proficiently while speaking subjectively. In this section, you will learn these basic but essential speaking strategies.

Later on in this chapter, you will learn how to develop a basic response into an advanced response to maximize scoring.

1. Basic Response: Step-by-Step Before you begin independent Speaking Task # 1, you will hear the directions for the speaking section. The directions will last approximately two minutes. Do not dismiss them. As you listen to the directions, make an G+TiC=C note map.

Step #1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

G = personally TiC = for example C = for those reasons Step #2 Read the prompt.

When the speaking directions end, the prompt will appear on your screen. A narrator will read it.

Prompt Why do people travel? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

When the narrator stops speaking, a countdown clock will appear on your screen. You will have 15 seconds to develop your response. The clock will count down (15, 14, 13). On your note map, jot down your opinion and one example.

G = personally travel to learn TiC = for example Manhattan C = for those reasons Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

When the countdown clock reaches zero, you will hear a Beep! Look at your note map. It is your guide. Start speaking. Speak subjectively. State your opinion, then your supporting illustration. End with your conclusion.

On the next page, notice how the opinion is restated in the conclusion. By restating your opinion in your conclusion, you will know exactly what to say and you will save time.

When you are finished speaking, speaking task two will immediately appear on your screen. Be ready for it.

Now check the sample practice response for C oherence using the proficiency checklist. Remember to ask yes-no questions starting with O rganization.

Does the response demonstrate organization?

The speaker uses deduction as a method of organization. This demonstrates organization. Yes  No _ Does the response demonstrate progression?

Because the speaker uses deduction, the ideas progress from general to specific. This demonstrates progression. Yes  No _ a. Does the introduction demonstrate development?

The speaker says, Personally, I like traveling because it is a learning experience. This is an opinion. It is arguable, supportable, a complete sentence and not a question. This demonstrates introduction development. Yes  No _ b. Does the hodvj demonstrate development?

The speaker uses the supporting illustration of Manhattan and develops it to describe the lesson learned from visiting Ground Zero. This demonstrates body development. Yes  No _ c. Does the conclusion demonstrate development?

The speaker restates her opinion in the conclusion. This demonstrates conclusion development. Yes  No _ a. Does the response demonstrate topical unity?

The speaker focuses on the topic of Manhattan and the lesson she learned there. There are no topic digressions. This demonstrates topical unity.

Yes  No _ b. Does the response demonstrate grammatical unity?

The transitions (TiC) and (TO) are correct. This demonstrates grammatical unity. Yes  No _ a. Does the speaker demonstrate proficient language use?

The speaker uses an adverb clause of reason (because it [traveling] is a learning experience) for the opinion and the superlative most interesting to describe the example Ground Zero. In addition, the speaker says Ground Zero is like a big hole in the heart of the city. This figure of speech (idiom) is a simile using like to make a direct comparison. There are no mistakes in syntax. Combined, this demonstrates proficient language use. Yes  No _ Note: We cannot evaluate the next three steps: delivery. However, when you practice in class, or alone with a recording device, ask these three questions.

a. Is the speakers fluency proficient?

Yes _ No _ b. Does the speaker demonstrate automaticity?

Yes _ No _ c. Is the speakers pronunciation pr oficient?

Yes _ No _ Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Does the response (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Because the speaker has proficiently demonstrated Organization, Progression, Development, Unity and Language Use, the response is coherent (OPDUL=C). The speakers argument is clear: Traveling to Manhattan was definitely a great learning experience. Yes  No _ Mapped out, you can see how G+TiC=C gives the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: a coherent spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C. Note: Transitions (T) are in bold, the supporting illustration (i) in italics, the opinion (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

Notice how the concluding sentences (TiC) state cause-and- effect relationships.

Looking at it made me realize that sometimes you just have to see things with your own eyes. That way you can understand what really happened.

Cause-and-effect relationships are the reasons stated in the prompt.

Prompt Why do people travel? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

Rating Yourself If you are preparing for the TOEFL iBT alone, use a recording device to record your voice. When you playback your response, rate your response using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist, then score yourself using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide. Identify those parts of OPDUL=C you need to improve for greater coherence, then record the same response with revisions. Playback the same response. Check it again using OPDUL=C, then rate it again.

By repeating the same response, you will be able to automatically remember G+TiC=C Rating in a Class When preparing for the TOEFL iBT in a TOEFL class, ask your instructor and classmates to check your response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist in the appendix, then rate your response using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide. Repeat the same response until you remember G+TiC=C automatically and can proficiently demonstrate OPDUL=C.

TASK: Rate the response about traveling and learning on page 166 using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320. Compare your rating to the one on page 340. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Do I have to use all 45 seconds? Is there some rule?

No. There is no official rule that says you have to speak for all 45 seconds.

A long response does not always mean a coherent response. On the contrary, a long response often means a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C).

Some test-takers simply speak and speak, thinking more is better.

Wrong. Your job is to deliver a response that proficiently demonstrates OPDUL=C. Do so using G+TiC=C.

How Long Should My Response Be?

Everyone speaks at a different pace. However, using G+TiC=C and speaking at a natural pace, you will able to deliver a response that demonstrates OPDUL=C in 45 seconds. The following map illustrates approximate time divisions for each step of G+TiC=C.

You are reading this example. On test day, you will pause and hesitate when you speak and thus use more time.

TASK: For practice timing yourself while you speak, read the sample responses throughout this chapter.

2. Basic Response: Step-by-Step Lets map out another single-question response. Remember to use G+TiC=C and the four steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

Step #2 Read the prompt.

When the speaking directions end, the prompt will appear on your screen. A narrator will read it.

Prompt Should teenagers work during high school? Why? Give illustrations and reasons to develop your argument Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

When the narrator stops reading the prompt, a countdown clock will appear on your screen. It will count down (15, 14, 13). You will have 15 seconds to develop your response. Remember to use personal experience examples to support your opinion.

Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

When the countdown clock reaches zero, you will hear a Beep! Look at your note map. Start speaking. State your opinion first, then your example.

End with your conclusion.

I agree.

For example, when I was a high school student, I had a job at a bookstore. It was, you know, fun. You should do it. You will really like it too. I guarantee.

So thats all I have to say. I think its clear what I think.

Words: 49 Check this sample practice response for Coherence using the proficiency checklist.

Does the response demonstrate organization?

The speaker uses neither deduction nor induction. This demonstrates a lack of organization. Yes _ No X Does the response demonstrate progression?

Because the speaker does not use a method of organization, the ideas do not progress. This demonstrates a lack of progression. Yes _ No X a. Does the introduction demonstrate development?

The speaker says, I agree. This is not an opinion. It is a fact. It is not arguable. This demonstrates a lack of introduction development. Yes_ No X b. Does the body demonstrate development?

The speaker does not develop a specific example. This demonstrates a lack of body development. Yes _ No X c. Does the conclusion demonstrate development?

The speaker does not restate his opinion at the end. This demonstrates a lack of conclusion development. Yes _ No X a. Does the response demonstrate topical unity?

The speaker focuses on the topic of working in high school. This demonstrates topical unity. Yes _ No _ b. Does the response demonstrate grammatical unity?

The transitions (TiC) and (TO) are correct. This demonstrates grammatical unity. Yes _ No _ a. Does the speaker demonstrate proficient language use?

There are no mistakes in syntax; however, the speaker uses only simple sentences. There are no idioms. There is no advanced vocabularly. This demonstrates a lack of language use. Yes _ No X Note: We cannot evaluate the next three steps: delivery. However, when you practice in class, or alone with a recording device, ask these three questions.

a Is the speakers fluency proficient?

Yes _ No _ b. Does the speaker demonstrate automaticity?

Yes _ No _ c. Is the speakers pronunciation proficient?

Yes _ No _ Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Does the response (argument) demonstrate coherence?

The speaker does not demonstrate a method of organization. Because there is no method of organization, the ideas do not progress or develop. Because the ideas do not progress or develop, there is no demonstration of language use. The result is a serious lack of coherence (OPDUL=C). Yes _ No X According to the Independent Speaking Rating Guide (page 320), this response will score in the 1.5-2.0 range. If you (the speaker) want a higher score, you must revise those parts of OPDUL=C that received an X. The Xs are your revision checklist. By identifying problem areas, you can focus on revising them when you practice. This, in turn, will make you test ready. On the next page, read the same response revised.

Personally, I think that high school students should work while going to school.

For example, when I was a high school student, I had a job at an English bookstore in Budapest, Hungary. I worked every Saturday and Sunday, and sometimes at night during the week. I loved it because I was always meeting foreigners who spoke English. By helping them find books, I was able to practice my English. It was great because at school, I only learned grammar from books, but at the bookstore I was learning conversational English. Not only that but I made money for myself. This helped me because I didnt always have to ask my parents for money for books and other things. As you can see, by working at the bookstore I killed two birds with one stone.

In conclusion, I believe that all high school students should work part-time during high school.

Words: 150 TASK: Rate this response using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320. Compare your rating to the one on page 340. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Rhetorical Strategies Rhetorical strategies demonstrate topic development (OPDUL=C) and language use (OPDUL=C). These, in turn, demonstrate coherence (OPDUL=C). The work-and-high-school essay demonstrates a variety of rhetorical strategies, including: the writer working in a bookstore in Budapest, Hungary; the writers personal story of working in a bookstore; English bookstoreworked every Saturday and Sunday and sometimes at nightI loved it; - work at the bookstore (cause) make money (effect); - work at the bookstore (cause) kill two birds with one stone (effect); - work at bookstore (cause) learn conversational English (effect); - work at the bookstore (cause) no longer depend on parents for money (effect); learn English grammar at high school v. learn conversational English at the bookstore.

3. Basic Response: Step-by-Step Lets map out another single-question response. Remember to use G+TiC=C and the four steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

Step #2 Read the prompt.

Prompt People are living longer. Why? Develop your position using examples and reasons.

Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

Personally, I contend that people are living longer because they are taking better care of themselves.

For example, my grandfather is eighty. When he was younger, he used to smoke and drink a lot. Also, he never ate very well. Then, when he was fifty, he had heart attack. He was in the hospital for a long time. The doctor told him he should stop smoking and drinking, and start eating better. Thats what my grandfather did.

Now, he doesnt drink or smoke anymore. Also, he eats lots of healthy food like salads and fish, and he exercises every day. As a result, he feels much better than before and has lots more energy.

By changing his lifestyle, my grandfather is definitely going to live longer because he is taking better care of himself.

Words: 134 TASK: Check this response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318, then rate it using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320. Compare your rating to the one on page 340. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Do I always have to say For example when I start to give my example?

No. For example is simply there to remind you that you need a transition after you state your opinion.

Below, you will find synonymous examples for for example. Remember: You can use these examples in your independent essay as well.

Personally, I contend that people are living longer because they are taking better care of themselves.

For example, my grandfather A good example is my grandfather An excellent example is my grandfather A good illustration is my eighty-year-old grandfather An illustration to support my opinion is my grandfather My grandfather, who is eighty, is an excellent illustration.

Four Common Problems Read the following prompt and the response.

In your view, what was the greatest invention of the twentieth Prompt century? Why? Give examples and reasons to support your argument.

Personally, I believe that the greatest invention of the twentieth century was women developing and winning many special rights they never had before from countries that didnt care about them, and I believe this is a good thing for all women.

For example, women were very successful. They did a lot of very important things that changed their lives. They won many rights they never had before.

Women winning rights was the greatest invention of the twentieth century because it helped them so much.

Words: 84 This response contains four common problems you should avoid on test day.

1. Overstated Opinion Read the speakers opinion once again.

Personally, I believe that the greatest invention of the twentieth century was women developing and winning many special rights they never had before from countries that didnt care about them and I believe this is a good thing for all women.

This test-taker is overstating her opinion. To overstate means to say too much. Avoid overstating your opinion by delivering it in one concise sentence, for example: Personally, I believe that the greatest invention of the twentieth century was women winning many rights.

2. Lack of Topic Development Read the supporting illustration from the same response.

For example, women were very successful. They did a lot of very important things that changed their lives. They won many rights they never had before.

In this body paragraph, does the test-taker develop a specific personal example to support her opinion? Is there a cause-and-effect relationship providing a reason? No. Because there is a lack of topic development (OPDUL=C), there is a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C). This will result in a lower score.

Look at the following maps. The supporting example in Map A lacks development. In contrast, Map B has a supporting example that is well-developed. If you want a high score, your response should look like Map B.

Lack of development, especially in the body paragraphe(s), is a big reason why test-takers score low on independent Speaking Task # 1.

3. Lack of Subjectivity Why was this test-taker unable to develop a supporting example for womens rights? Because she was trying to speak objectively. In her own language, she knew what she wanted to say objectively, but she couldnt translate it into objective English in 45 seconds. In the end, she became frustrated and lost focus. As a result, she hesitated too much. This demonstrated a lack of proficient language use (OPDUL=C), specifically fluency and automaticity. The result was a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C).

Avoid big topics. Dont talk about Einstein or Bill Gates. Talk subjectively. Talk about you. When you talk about your own experience, you are more confident. Because you are more confident, you make fewer mistakes. Fewer mistakes = increased language use proficiency = greater coherence = a higher score.

4. Off Topic Response Read the prompt once again. Notice that the topic in the prompt is the greatest invention of the twentieth century. This test-taker, however, talks about womens rights. Womens rights is not an invention. It is a political idea. An invention, in this context, means an original material idea, i.e., Marcian Edward Hoff, Jr. inventing the microprocessor.

Carefully read the prompt. Make sure you understand it before you respond. Make sure you are on topic (talking about the topic in the prompt) not off topic (talking about a different topic), for example: Personally, I think that the car was the greatest invention of the twentieth century.

For example, I am from Turkey. I remember my mother and father telling me how they had a horse before they had a car. The horse was very important because it did everything, such as work in the fields and take vegetables to market. Using a horse, though, was very slow. Everything took so much time. But then my father bought a car and everything changed completely. He could go places more quickly and he could take more vegetables to market.

Best of all, he took my mother to the hospital to have me.

In conclusion, I think that for me and my family, the greatest invention of the twentieth century was the car.

Words: 128 TASK: Check the previous response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318, then rate it using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320. Compare your rating to the one in the answer key on page 340. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Help! - My Response is Too Long!

Listed below are reasons why your response is longer than 45 seconds.

Reason #1 Your opinion is too long.

Solution 1. Make your opinion shorter.

2. State your opinion in one concise sentence.

3. State your opinion in 5 seconds or less.

4. Speak faster; try not to hesitate.

Reason #2 When the clock starts, you are not speaking right away. As a result, you are losing valuable seconds at the start.

Solution Start speaking right after the beep. Remember: The speaking tasks come up fast. Be ready for them You are being too careful. When you are too careful, you Reason #3 slow down to pronounce correctly. When you slow down, you waste time. You also decrease fluency and automaticity.

1. Speak at a natural pace.

Solution 2. Record your voice, then play it back. You will know if you are speaking too slowly. If so, speak faster.

You are pausing or hesitating too much. Record your voice and play it back. You will soon know if you are pausing or Reason #4 hesitating too much. Pausing and hesitating wastes time.

Pausing and hesitating will also decrease fluency and automaticity.

1. Avoid pauses; try not to hesitate.

Solution 2. Practice reading sample responses until you speak confidently and at the right speed.

3. Ask a native speaker to demonstrate the right speed.

Reason #5 You are pausing and/or hesitating too much because you have not memorized G+TiC=C.

1. Memorize G+TiC=C.

Solution 2. Practice reading sample responses.

Reason #6 Your supporting illustration (TiC) contains too much information.

1. Do not include information that is not important or off topic.

Solution 2. Develop one example only (G+TiC=C). Remember: One well-developed example is better than two examples that lack development.

Reason #7 Your conclusion is too long.

1. State your conclusion in five seconds or less.

Solution 2. Simply repeat your opinion.

Reason #8 The clock makes you so nervous you cant speak.

Solution 1. Do not time yourself when you practice. Just speak.

When you are more confident, time yourself.

Help! - My Response is Too Short!

Listed below are reasons why your response is too short.

Reason #1 You are nervous. When you are nervous, you speak too fast and finish too soon.

Solution 1. Record your voice and play it back. You will soon know if you are speaking too fast. If so, slow down.

Reason #2 Your supporting illustration is too short. If your example is too short, it will lack development.

Solution 1. Include more details when you develop your supporting example. Identify all place names and people names.

Remember: Be specific. If you studied mechanical engineering at Tsinghua University in China from 2000 to 2003, say, I studied mechanical engineering at Tsinghua University in China from 2000 to 2003.

Reason #3 You speak, then suddenly stop because you are shy or afraid, or feel stupid.

1. Practice reading into a recording device. Read an English magazine article or a book while recording. This will help you develop confidence speaking into a Solution microphone.

2. Take an ESL class to develop your speaking skills and your confidence.

3. Practice. Practice. Practice.

Reason #4 You are not confident using G+TiC=C.

1. Practice developing and delivering responses until you Solution have memorized G+TiC=C and you can remember it automatically without notes.

Reason #5 You blank out.

1. You are trying too hard or are too nervous. Try to relax.

When you practice speaking, dont time yourself, just speak until you are confident. When you are more Solution 1.

confident, then time yourself.

2. Forget about trying to demonstrate OPDUL=C. Just speak. The more you speak, the more confident you will become.

Clean Start A clean start means you start speaking with no hesitation. You state your opinion clearly and succinctly, then progress to your supporting illustration, for example: G = Personally, I think that students should have part-time jobs while in high school.

For example, when I was a high school student, I had a job at TiC = an English bookstore in Budapest, Hungary. My job was to put books on the shelves and help customers.

Rough Start A rough start means you are using conversational (non academic) English.

This will result in a lack of fluency and automaticity (OPDUL=C), and coherence (OPDUL=C), for example: G = Yo. I think its good. Working in high school. Everybody should do it. Make some money. Cool.

TiC = A good example? There are lots. Really.

Clean End A clean end means you clearly and succinctly restate your opinion and stop.

Resist the temptation to say more or to correct yourself, for example: C = For those reasons, working in a bookstore in high school really helped me to become more independent and responsible.

Rough End A rough end means you are speaking conversationally. This will result in a lack of fluency and automaticity (OPDUL=C), and coherence (OPDUL=C), for example: Working was, you know, fun. Everybody should do it. Thats C = all. No. Actually, I hated it. Money causes nothing but problems. Is this microphone on?

Advanced Strategies To maximize scoring, apply the following advanced strategies to develop a basic response into an advanced response.

G+2TiC=C One way to develop a basic response into an advanced response is by adding a second body paragraph. Do so by changing G+TiC=C to G+2TiC=C.

A second body paragraph will result in greater topic development (OPDUL=C). For example, read the following prompt.

Prompt Which person has been the greatest influence in your life? Give examples and reasons to support and develop your opinion.

Now read the sample response on the next page.

Personally, I believe that my mother has been the biggest influence in my life.

For example, I am now in America working as an au pair. An au pair is like a babysitter who lives with an American family. I am doing this for a year in Stamford, Connecticut. At first I didnt want to come to America and leave all my friends in Estonia, but my mother said it would be a great experience and a great way to develop my English. She was right. Living with an American family has been a wonderful experience and my English is so much better.

Also, my mother is my inspiration. When I was growing up, she was a high school teacher. This was strange because all my friends mothers were housewives. But my mother wanted to work. She always told me to just follow my heart. I remember these words whenever I have problems in America, and they give me strength.

For those reasons, my mother has been the biggest influence in my life.

Words: 173 Which is better? G+TiC=C or G+2TiC=C?

If can demonstrate OPDUL=C using G+TiC=C, good. G+2TiC=C?

Great.

What about G+3TiC=C?

If you try and develop three examples (G+3TiC=C), you will run out of time trying to develop all three body paragraphs.

What if I keep running out of time when practicing using G+2TiC=C?

Develop only one example using G+TiC=C.

One well-developed example is better than two or three examples that lack development.

Advanced Introduction Strategies To maximize scoring, apply the following advanced introduction strategies to develop a basic response into an advanced response.

Simple Hooks A simple hook uses the information in the prompt. In the following examples, notice how the hook comes first, followed by the transition and the opinion. Combined, they form the introduction (G) of your response.

introduction (G) = hook + transition + opinion a. Or Question Hook For this hook, start with an or question. Next, give a transition, then answer the question. The answer is your opinion, for example: G Is surfing the internet dangerous or not? From my point of view, I believe that surfing the net is not dangerous.

b. Restate-the-Prompt Hook For this hook, first restate the prompt. Next, give a transition, then state your opinion, for example: G The question is whether fast food is good or bad for children. As far as Im concerned, I think fast food is bad for children.

c. Pro-Con Hook For this hook, state the pro (positive) side and the con (negative) side of the argument. Next, give a transition, then state your opinion, for example: G Some think that homeschooling is best for children while others argue that children should go to a regular school.

In my estimation, I believe that homeschooling is best for children.

d. General Fact + Question Hook For this hook, start with a general fact. Next, ask an or question. Write a transition, then answer the question. The answer is your opinion, for example: G Children all over the world watch a lot of television every day. Is it good or bad for them? Personally, I think it is bad for them.

Complex Hooks A complex hook uses information from researched sources, information you bring to the test. For complex hook strategies you can use to develop your introduction for this speaking task, see Complex Hooks for the Independent Essay.

Watch the clock. Hooks can use up a lot of time.

Inverted-Pyramid Introduction Why is a hook an effective strategy? Because your introduction (hook + transition + opinion) will look like an inverted (upside down) pyramid in which the ideas progress from general to specific.

The raters will listen for an inverted-pyramid introduction. An inverted-pyramid introduction demonstrates OPDUL=C.

Predictor Thesis To maximize scoring, start your response with a predictor thesis. Because you only have 45 seconds to speak, develop a predictor thesis with two predictors only (G+2TiC=C), for example: Look at the following predictor thesis. Notice how each predictor becomes a topic sentence in each body paragraph. Notice also how she becomes the topic identifier My mother in each body paragraph topic sentence (TiC).

Predictor Thesis: Using Synonyms Look at the following predictor thesis.

Personally, I think that customers should be allowed to return purchased items for a full refund within thirty days.

To demonstrate language use, replace Personally with a synonymous phrase, for example: Next, look at the main verb think followed by that.

Personally, I think that customers should be allowed to return purchased items for a full refund within thirty days.

Replace think that with a synonymous phrase. This will demonstrate language use (OPDUL=C).

1. In my experience, I feel that customers should be allowed to return purchased items for a full refund within thirty days.

2. In my view, I posit that customers should be allowed to return purchased items for a full refund within thirty days.

3. From my perspective, I contend that customers should be allowed to return purchased items for a full refund within thirty days.

4. Personally speaking, I believe that customers should be allowed to return purchased items for a full refund within thirty days.

5. In my estimation, I postulate that customers should be allowed to return purchased items for a full refund within thirty days.

6. From my perspective, I reason that customers should be allowed to return purchased items for a full refund within thirty days.

Look at a following response with a predictor thesis. Notice that the predictors unite with each body paragraph topic sentence. This demonstrates organization, progression, development, unity and language use (OPDUL=C).This demonstrates coherence (OPDUL=C).

Personally speaking, I believe that my mother has been the biggest influence in my life because she encourages and inspires me.

My mother encourages me. For example, Im now in America working as an au pair. An au pair is like a babysitter who lives with an American family. I am doing this for a year in Stamford, Connecticut. At first I didnt want to come to America and leave all my friends in Estonia, but my mother said it would be a great experience and a great way to develop my English. She was right.

Living with an American family has been a wonderful experience and my English is so much better.

Also, my mother inspires me. When I was growing up, she was a high school teacher. This was strange because all my friends mothers were housewives. But my mother wanted to work. She always told me to just follow my heart. I remember these words whenever I have problems in America, and they give me strength.

For those reasons, I believe that my mother has been the biggest influence in my life.

Words: 185 Only by practicing will you know if you can develop and deliver a spoken response that demonstrates a predictor thesis and OPDUL=C in 45 seconds.

Watch the clock. A predictor thesis can use up a lot of time.

A predictor thesis is an excellent advanced strategy; however, if your body paragraphs are not well-developed, a predictor thesis will not substantially increase your score. A predictor thesis and well-developed body paragraphs will substantially increase your score.

The Rhetorical Why The rhetorical why is a question you ask and answer yourself at the start of your argument. Asking yourself why is like having a conversation with yourself. More importantly, it signals the start of your argument. It is also a good way to start speaking, especially if you are nervous or shy. Look at the following examples.

Personally, I believe that my mother has been the biggest influence in my life. Why has my mother been the biggest influence in my life? Because she encourages and inspires me.

In my opinion, exercising is good for you. Why is exercising good for you? Because it reduces stress and helps you sleep.

In the previous examples, notice how the rhetorical why is followed by the predictor. Notice also that the predictor begins with Because. Because signals the start of your argument.

Often a rhetorical why is reduced to simply Why?, for example: Personally, I believe that my mother has been the biggest influence in my life. Why? Because she encourages and inspires me.

In my opinion, exercising is good for you. Why? Because it reduces stress and helps you sleep.

By simply asking why, you will save time. Use that time to develop your supporting illustrations.

You can use the rhetorical why when writing your independent essay.

Advanced Conclusion Strategies To maximize scoring, apply the following advanced conclusion strategies to develop a basic response essay into an advanced response.

a. Suggestion For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a suggestion.

C In sum, I assert that video games are a bad influence on kids. Instead of playing video games, I think that parents should make their kids go outside and play.

C As I have illustrated, video games are a bad influence on kids. If you want healthy kids, I suggest that you turn off the computer for a few hours every day and make your kids go outside and play.

b. Suggestion + Prediction For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a suggestion and a prediction. Notice how the prediction contains the auxiliary verb will to describe a future action.

C In the final analysis, I contend that playing sports is good for children. They should try and play a winter sport like hockey and a summer sport like soccer or baseball. It will teach them how to socialize and be team players.

C In the end, I think that its better to spend the money you make. Be like me and spend all the money you earn. By doing so, you will be happy and never worry about tomorrow.

c. Warning + Prediction For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a warning that contains a prediction of future of events.

C It goes without saying that global warming is a serious problem. The ice at the North Pole is melting so fast that soon there will be no more ice, just water.

C As far as Im concerned, I believe that a new factory in my home town is a good idea. It will create a lot of new jobs and provide more tax money, money the town can use to build new roads and bridges.

d. Rhetorical Question For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a rhetorical question. A rhetorical question makes your reader think about your argument after your response has ended.

C Suffice it to say, I think that a new factory in my hometown is a good idea. Yes, there will be some pollution, but arent jobs more important?

C In my estimation, I believe that homeschooling is not good for children. Do you really want your kids to miss the fun of going to school every day?

e. Call-To-Action For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, then end with a call-to-action. Call-to-action means you are telling people to do something (take action) with an emphatic (strong) voice.

C In sum, I conclude that video games are a bad influence on kids. Parents, turn off the computer. Now!

C Finally, I believe that recycling is a good way to help the planet. Dont throw paper and plastic away. Recycle!

f. Call-To-Action + Rhetorical Question For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, give a call-to-action, then end with a rhetorical question.

C In closing, I believe that video games are a bad influence on kids. Parents, turn off the computer! Do you really want violent kids?

C When all is said and done, I contend that recycling is important. Save the planet! Can you imagine a world full of garbage?

You can also ask a rhetorical question first, then end with a call-to-action.

C In closing, I conclude that video games are not good for children. Do you really want violent kids? Parents, turn off the computer. Now!

C When all is said and done, I assert that computers are important for fun and for learning. Can you imagine a world without computers? Be happy. Be productive. Buy a computer!

g. Suggestion + Prediction + Rhetorical Question For this strategy, start with a transition, restate your opinion, make a suggestion and a prediction, then end with a rhetorical question.

C In the final analysis, I conclude that video games are a bad influence on kids. If you are a parent, tell your kids to turn the computer off and go outside. Doing so will make your kids happier and healthier. Isnt that how you want your kids to grow up?

C All in all, I believe that the internet is great for research.

If you need information fast, just log on to the internet.

You can google whatever youre looking for and you will find it fast. What more could you ask for?

h. Predictor Thesis Restated in Your Conclusion To develop your conclusion, restate your predictor thesis in your conclusion. After you restate your predictor thesis, add a conclusion strategy.

C It goes without saying that my mother has been the biggest influence in my life because she encourages and inspires me. I hope that when I have a daughter, I can encourage and inspire her.

i. Predictor Conclusion + Synonyms Look the following predictor thesis restated in the conclusion.

C In conclusion, I believe that students should work part-time while going to high school.

To demonstrate language use, replace the transition In conclusion with a synonymous phrase, for example: Pyramid Conclusion Why is an advanced conclusion an effective strategy? Because your conclusion will look like a pyramid in which the ideas progress from specific to general.

The speaking raters will listen for a pyramid introduction. A pyramid introduction demonstrates OPDUL=C.

Advanced Responses The following responses demonstrate how advanced strategies can turn a basic response into an advanced response. As you read each response, notice that it is really just a mini independent essay. In other words, the strategies for the Independent Essay and Speaking Task # 1 (and for Speaking Task #2) are interchangeable.

TASK: For practice, time yourself as you read each sample response out loud. You have 45 seconds.

Sample #1 Prompt Why do people travel? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

People travel for many reasons. Some travel for fun.

Others travel to learn about new cultures. From my experience, I like traveling because its a learning experience.

For example, last year I went to Manhattan. I visited many famous places like The Met and Radio City Music Hall. The most interesting place was Ground Zero. Ground Zero is where the World Trade Center once stood. Now, its nothing but a big hole. On TV it doesnt look so big. But seeing it in person, I had no idea it was so huge. Its like a big hole in the heart of the city. Looking at it made me realize that sometimes you just have to see things with your own eyes. That way you can understand what really happened.

It goes without saying that traveling to Manhattan was a great learning experience for me. If you want to learn about a new culture, you should travel. Go for it!

Youll have a great time.

Words: 164 Sample #2 Prompt Should teenagers work during high school?

Why? Give illustrations and reasons to develop your argument.

The question is should teenagers work during high school.

Personally, I think that all students should work while going to high school.

For example, when I was a high school student, I had a job at an English bookstore in Budapest, Hungary. I worked every Saturday and Sunday, and sometimes at night during the week. I loved it because I was always meeting foreigners who spoke English. By helping them find books, I was able to practice my English. It was great because at school, I only learned grammar from books, but at the bookstore I was learning conversational English. Not only that but I made money for myself. This helped me because I didnt always have to ask my parents for money for books and other things. As you can see, by working at the bookstore I killed two birds with one stone.

To sum up, I believe that all high school students should work part-time during high school. Its a great experience that will open many new doors. Isnt that what lifes all about?

Words: 176 Sample #3 Prompt In your view, what was the greatest invention of the twentieth century? Why? Give examples and reasons to support your argument.

There were so many inventions in the last century, such as the airplane and the microprocessor. Yet in my opinion, I can honestly say that the car was the greatest invention in the twentieth century.

Why? Let me explain.

I am from Turkey. I remember my mother and father telling me how they had a horse before they had a car. The horse was very important because it did everything, such as work in the fields and take vegetables to market. Using a horse, though, was very slow.

Everything took so much time. But then my father bought a car and everything changed completely. Like day and night. Suddenly, my father could go places more quickly and he could take more vegetables to market. Best of all, he took my mother to the hospital to have me.

In conclusion, I think that for me and my family, the greatest invention of the twentieth century was the car. No car. No me.

Words: 161 Sample #4 Prompt These days people are living longer. Why?

Develop your position using examples and reasons.

Why are people living longer these days? Personally, I contend that people are living longer because they are taking better care of themselves.

A good example is my grandfather. When he was younger, he used to smoke and drink a lot. Also, he never ate very well. Then when he was fifty, he had heart attack. He was in the hospital for a long time. The doctor told him he should stop smoking and drinking, and start eating better. Thats what my grandfather did. Now, he doesnt drink or smoke anymore. Also, he eats lots of healthy food like salads and fish, and he exercises every day. As a result, he feels much better than before and has lots more energy.

As you can see, by changing his lifestyle, my grandfather is definitely going to live longer because he is taking better care of himself. If you want to live longer, you should take care of yourself too.

Words: 158 Sample #5 Prompt Which person has been the greatest influence in your life? Give examples and reasons to support and develop your opinion.

A lot of people have influenced my life. However, it goes without saying that my mother has been the biggest influence in my life because she encourages and inspires me.

My mother encourages me. For example, Im now in America working as an au pair. An au pair is like a babysitter who lives with an American family. Im doing this for a year in Stamford, Connecticut. At first I didnt want to come to America and leave all my friends in Estonia, but my mother said it would be a great experience and a great way to develop my English. She was right.

Living with an American family has been a wonderful experience and my English is so much better.

Also, my mother inspires me. When I was growing up, my mother was a high school teacher. This was strange because all my friends mothers were housewives. But my mother wanted to work. She always told me to just follow your heart. I remember these words whenever I have problems in America, and they give me strength.

As you can see, my mother has been the biggest influence in my life because she encourages and inspires me. I hope that when I have a daughter, I can encourage and inspire her.

Words: 210 The advanced responses are really good. Is it really possible to develop and deliver these kinds of responses in 45 seconds on test day?

Yes, but only if you practice a lot. By doing so, you will know exactly what to do on test day without guessing. You will also learn how to manage your time.

TOEFL is an English language proficiency test and a time-management test.

Emergency Response What if you cant develop a response for this task? What if you blank out?

What should you do? Follow these four steps and deliver an emergency response.

Step #1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

Step #2 Read the prompt.

Make sure you understand the prompt before you respond. Make sure you are on topic (talking about the topic in the prompt) not off topic (talking about a different topic).

Prompt Can a pet change a persons behavior? Explain your position using supporting illustrations and reasons.

Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

If you blank out, do not state an opinion at first. Instead, tell a personal story. When you tell a personal story, you are using induction, TiC=C. Look at the following example using induction as a method of organization. Notice how the response progresses from specific (TiC; the story of the test-takers brother) to a conclusion (C) about the benefits of pets for autistic children based on the example.

My younger brother has autism and for a long time he never talked to anybody. Also, he would get angry really easily for reasons nobody could understand. Then one day the doctor told my parents that they should get a dog. We never had a dog or any pets before, but my parents really wanted to make my brother happy, so we got a dog and called him Happy. Well, Im telling you, it was amazing.

My brother loves Happy. Before my brother was always quiet and angry, but with Happy, my brother always talks and smiles. The change was amazing. Now, my brother and Happy are just like best friends.

As you can see, a pet can really change a someones life. If you have a brother or sister with the autism, I recommend that you to get a dog or a cat. It will make them smile like youve never seen before.

Words: 154 We all love to tell stories. Use this innate human ability to develop an emergency response for independent Speaking Tasks #1 and #2, and for the Independent Essay.

Contrarian Response What if you think the question in the prompt is strange, doesnt make sense, or is not asking the right question? How can you respond? In this case, develop a contrarian response. Read the following prompt, then read the contrarian response.

Prompt How has technology made the world a better place? Develop your argument using examples and reasons.

Has technology made the world a better place? No. Technology has not made the world a better place. This is only what people in rich countries believe.

For example, here in America people think that everybody is the same all over the world. Everybody has a car and a laptop, and a cell phone. But this is not true. Why not? Because two-thirds of the people in the world, over 3 billion people, make less than one American dollar a day. Moreover, these same people have no education. Because they have no education, they dont have good jobs, or the money to buy computers and iPods. Most are lucky if they eat one meal a day. Come to my country, and you will see that this is true.

In conclusion, technology has not made the world a better place. If anything, technology has simply drawn a clearer line between the majority poor and the minority rich.

Words: 156 Make sure your contrarian response is a serious argument. Even if you think that the prompt is asking the wrong question, you must still demonstrate OPDUL=C.

Speaking Practice TASK: Using G+TiC=C or G+2TiC=C and the four steps, develop and deliver a basic response that demonstrates OPDUL=C for each of the following prompts you have already studied (see the end of the chapter for a step-by-step guide). If you have trouble, go back and look at the sample responses for help. Use a recording device and check each response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318. Rate each response using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320.

Why do people travel? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

Should teenagers work during high school? Why? Give illustrations and reasons to develop your argument.

Which technology in the past fifty years has changed your life the most? Why? Develop your position using examples and reasons.

In your view, what was the greatest invention of the twentieth century?

Why? Give examples and reasons to support your argument.

These days people are living longer. Why? Develop your position using examples and reasons.

Which person has been the greatest influence in your life? Give examples and reasons to support and develop your opinion.

More Speaking Practice TASK: Using G+TiC=C or G+2TiC=C and the four steps, develop and deliver a response for each of the following prompts. Use a recording device and check each response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318. Rate each response using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320.

Many people leave their home country. Why? Give examples and reasons to support your argument.

What is your idea of the perfect neighborhood? Support your position with illustrations and reasons.

Why is the car important in daily life? Develop your response using examples and reasons.

When is the best time to go on a vacation? Support your argument using examples and reasons.

Why do some people never get married? Use examples and reasons to develop your argument.

What Have You Learned?

In this chapter, you learned how to develop, revise and deliver a variety of spoken responses for single-question prompts using G+TiC=C and the four steps. By doing so, you can demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

#1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

#2 Read the prompt.

#3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

#4 Speak (45 seconds).

Test-takers who get high independent speaking scores have practiced speaking a lot.

Speaking Task Two Independent Task: Paired-Choice Prompt For this task, you will develop and verbally deliver a personal-opinion argument in 45 seconds. The task order follows.

Prompt Types For this task, you will answer a paired-choice prompt, for example: Prompt Exercising reduces stress. Do you agree or disagree? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

Where have you seen paired-choice prompts before? The independent essay. In fact, independent speaking task two (like independent Speaking Task #1) is really just a mini independent essay. However, instead of developing your argument in writing, you will develop it in 15 seconds, then deliver it verbally in 45 seconds.

How can you develop and deliver a mini, verbal independent essay in 60 seconds? By using G+TiC=C to demonstrate OPDUL=C.

1. Agree-Disagree Prompt: Step-by-Step When answering an agree-disagree prompt, speak subjectively using G+TiC=C and follow the four steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

Step #2 Read the prompt.

The prompt will appear on your screen. A narrator will read it.

Prompt We need zoos. Do you agree or disagree?

Why? Give examples and reasons to support your opinion.

Avoid double arguments. Double arguments are identified by or or prefer in paired-choice prompts. Choose one side of the argument and develop it, for example: You only have 45 seconds speaking time. If you try to develop a double argument, you will run out of time and not be able to develop both arguments. This will result in a lack of topic development (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

When the narrator stops speaking, a countdown clock will appear on your screen. You will have 15 seconds to develop your response. The clock will count down (15, 14, 13). On your note map, jot down your opinion and one example. Remember to use your own personal experience.

Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

When the countdown clock reaches zero, you will hear a Beep! Look at your note map. It is your guide. Remember to speak subjectively.

Look at the following basic response.

Personally, I agree. I think that we need zoos.

For example, when I was 12, my teacher took us to the zoo in Berlin. I had never seen wild animals before. I had just read about them in books and seen them on the TV. But seeing them in real life was amazing, especially the lions. On TV, they looked so small, but seeing them alive they were really big. By going to the zoo, I definitely saw things in a whole new light.

In sum, I think that we need zoos.

To develop this basic response, add another body paragraph (G+2TiC=C).

Personally, I agree. I think that we need zoos. Why?

For example, when I was 12, my teacher took us to the zoo in Berlin. I had never seen wild animals before. I had just read about them in books and seen them on the TV. But seeing them in real life was amazing, especially the lions. On TV, they looked so small, but seeing them alive they were really big. By going to the zoo, I definitely saw things in a whole new light.

Now I have a family and we always go to the zoo every summer. My wife makes a picnic and we spend all day there. My kids love taking pictures and learning all about the animals, especially the gorillas.

Being outside is good for my children. Best of all, they can leave the internet and the TV at home.

For those reasons, I think that we need zoos.

To develop this basic response into an advanced response, add a rhetorical why, add a predictor thesis, then restate it in the conclusion.

From my point of view, I agree. I believe that we need zoos. Why? Because zoos are educational and fun for families.

Zoos are educational. For example, when I was 12, my teacher took us to the zoo in Berlin. I had never seen wild animals before. I had just read about them in books and seen them on the TV. But seeing them in real life was amazing, especially the lions. On TV, they looked so small, but seeing them alive they were really big. By going to the zoo, I definitely saw things in a whole new light.

Zoos are also good for families. For example, now I have a family and we always go to the zoo every summer. My wife makes a picnic and we spend all day there. My kids love taking pictures and learning all about the animals, especially the gorillas. Being outside is good for my children. Best of all, they can leave the internet and the TV at home.

For those reasons, I contend that we need zoos. Zoos are educational and fun for families.

Words: 183 2. Agree-Disagree Prompt: Step-by-Step Lets map out another agree-disagree response using G+2TiC=C.

Remember to follow the four steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

Step #2 Read the prompt.

Prompt Exercising reduces stress. Do you agree or disagree? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

When the narrator stops speaking, a countdown clock will appear on your screen. You will have 15 seconds to develop your response. The clock will count down (15, 14, 13). On your note map, jot down ideas.

Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

When the countdown clock reaches zero, you will hear a Beep! Look at your note map. It is your guide. Start speaking.

The prompt asks whether exercising reduces stress or not. Personally, I posit that exercising does reduce stress. Why? For these reasons.

First, after class I run up and down a big hill near my university. The distance is ten miles. It is definitely hard work, but I love it. If I dont run every day, I have a hard time sleeping. After I run, I feel stress free. Best of all, I sleep like a log.

Next is my girlfriend. She loves to exercise too.

After a hard day of work, she hits the gym near our house and does yoga and pilates. She says it is a great way to relieve the pressures of being a new lawyer in a big law firm.

In sum, exercising definitely reduces stress. If you want to stay happy and healthy, you should exercise every day.

Words: 143 Mapped out, you can see how G+2TiC=C gives the speaking raters what they are trained to look for: a coherent spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C. Note: Transitions (T) are in bold, the supporting illustration (i) in italics, the opinion (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

TASK: Check this response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318. Rate it using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320. Compare your rating to the one on page 341. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Support-Dont Support Prompt: Step-by-Step When answering a support-dont support prompt, use G+TiC=C and the four steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

Step #2 Read the prompt.

Prompt A big airport will be built near your hometown.

Do you or dont you support the new airport?

Develop your argument using examples and reasons.

Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

From my perspective, I support a new airport near my hometown. Why? Because we need jobs.

I live in Osnabrueck, Germany. Osnabrueck is a small city with many tourist attractions. The businesses we have, however, are small and dont offer many jobs to young people, so the young people always move away to big cities like Berlin and Frankfurt. But if we got a new airport, we could have many jobs for young people. If they got jobs, they could stay and help develop the economy of Osnabrueck. Also, the airport will attract other new businesses, and that is good for creating jobs too.

For the aforementioned reasons, I support the new airport. A new airport will be good for Osnabrueck.

If we dont accept it, some other town will and Osnabrueck will lose jobs and young people.

Words: 138 TASK: Check this response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318. Rate it using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320. Compare your rating to the one on page 341. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Rhetorical Strategies By using G+TiC=C or G+2TiC=C, your response will demonstrate a variety of rhetorical strategies. Rhetorical strategies demonstrate topic development (OPDUL=C) and proficient language use (OPDUL=C). Topic development and proficient language use = greater coherence (OPDUL=C) = a higher score.

The airport essay demonstrates a variety of rhetorical strategies, including: Preference Prompt: Step-by-Step When answering a preference prompt, use G+TiC=C and the four steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

Step #2 Read the prompt.

Prompt At home, do your prefer to make each meal from basic ingredients or do you prefer ready-to-eat meals? Use examples and reasons to support your opinion.

Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

From my experience, I prefer ready-to-eat meals.

Why? Because they are fast and easy for me to prepare.

When I get up in the morning, I dont have time to make breakfast from basic ingredients like bacon and eggs. I have to get ready and leave my house early so I can get to work on time. I usually eat some yogurt and a banana. Sometimes I buy a bagel on the way to work. After work, Im too tired to make dinner from basic ingredients, so I just put some spaghetti or a chicken dinner into the microwave and I can have a hot meal quickly. You pay more for ready-to-eat meals, but I dont mind. Besides, I hate cooking and washing dishes.

To sum up, I prefer to eat ready-to-eat meals.

Words: 133 TASK: Check this response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318. Rate it using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320. Compare your rating to the one on page 341. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Argument-Counter Argument: Step-by-Step A second type of preference prompt is the argument-counter argument prompt (for more on argument-counter arguments, see the Integrated Essay). Follow these steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

Step #2 Read the prompt.

Prompt Some prefer to shop online while others prefer to shop at stores. Discuss both options, then state your preference. Use illustrations and reasons to develop your position.

Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

Notice the transition However. This transition of contrast connects the two arguments: the argument that supports online shopping v. the speakers counter argument (the preference for shopping at the mall).

Some people prefer to shop at the mall while others prefer to shop online. Personally, I prefer to shop at the mall.

These days the internet makes everything so easy, especially shopping. You can find a big selection and lots of really good prices online, and you dont even have to leave your home.

However, I prefer to go to the mall, especially for shoes. When I buy shoes, I need to try them on. If I buy them online, I never know how they will fit. This is a hassle because if they dont fit, it takes a lot of time to return them and get my money back. But if I buy shoes at the mall, and they dont fit, I can exchange them or get the right size right away. This is much more convenient.

For those reasons, I definitely prefer to shop at the mall.

Words: 149 TASK: Check this response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318. Rate it using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320. Compare your rating to the one on page 341. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Advantage-Disadvantage: Step-by-Step When answering an advantage-disadvantage prompt, use G+2TiC=C. Body paragraph one will develop an advantage while body paragraph two will develop a disadvantage, or vice versa.

Step #1 Make an G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

Step #2 Read the prompt.

Prompt What are the advantages and disadvantages of home schooling? Use illustrations and reasons to develop your argument.

Step #3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

Step #4 Speak (45 seconds).

Notice how body paragraph one develops a disadvantage of homeschooling while body paragraph two develops an advantage. Notice as well how However connects the two opposing arguments.

Personally, I think there are advantages and disadvantages to homeschooling.

For example, my friend Sarah studied at home with her mom. Sarah was really smart but she never knew how to talk to people. She never went to parties or a had a boyfriend. All she did was study with her mom. That is one big disadvantage of home schooling. You dont have many friends.

However, by studying all the time, Sarah got really good grades. She is now going to Harvard. She wants to be a doctor. To be a doctor, you must study very hard. That is one big advantage of studying at home. You can study with no distractions like sports or band practice.

For those reasons, there are advantages and disadvantages to homeschooling. Personally, I think you need a balance between making friends and studying.

Words: 139 TASK: Check this response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318. Rate it using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320. Compare your rating to the one on page 341.

Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Refer to the previous chapter (Speaking Task#1) for more information on how you can maximize scoring by applying the following strategies when answering a paired-choice prompt.

Advanced Introduction Strategies Advanced Conclusion Strategies Emergency Response Contrarian Response Refer to the previous chapter as well for these topic areas.

How Long Should My Response Be?

Four Common Problems Help!  My Response is Too Long!

Help!  My Response is Too Short!

Speaking Practice TASK: Using G+TiC=C or G+2TiC=C and the four steps, develop and deliver a basic response that demonstrates OPDUL=C for each of the following prompts you have already studied (see the end of the chapter for a step-by-step guide). If you have trouble, go back and look at the sample responses for help. Use a recording device and check each response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318. Rate each response using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320.

We need zoos. Do you agree or disagree? Why? Give examples and reasons to support your opinion.

Exercising reduces stress. Do you agree or disagree? Develop your opinion using examples and reasons.

A big airport will be built near your hometown. Do you or dont you support the new airport? Develop your argument using illustrations and reasons.

At home, do your prefer to make each meal from basic ingredients or do you prefer ready-to-eat meals? Use examples and reasons to support your opinion.

Some prefer to shop online while others prefer to shop at shores.

Discuss both options, then state your preference. Use illustrations and reasons to develop your position.

What are the advantages and disadvantages of home schooling? Use illustrations and reasons to develop your argument.

More Speaking Practice TASK: Using G+TiC=C or G+2TiC=C and the four steps, develop and deliver a response for each of the following prompts. Use a recording device and check each response for coherence using the Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 318.

Rate each response using the Independent Speaking Rating Guide on page 320.

Do you think it is better to give a gift or receive a gift? Give examples and reasons to support your opinion.

Education should be free. Do you agree or disagree? Give illustrations and reasons to support your answer.

What are the advantages and disadvantages of text messaging? Support your argument with examples and reasons.

Which would you prefer a boat, a car or a house? Why? Develop your position with illustrations and reasons.

Do you agree or disagree: Watching a movie at home is better than going to the movie theatre. Support your argument with examples and reasons.

Before an important exam, do you think it is better to prepare for a long time or only for a few days? Give examples and reasons to support your argument.

What are the advantages and disadvantages of living in a foreign country? Give illustrations and reasons to develop your opinion.

Some prefer to stay home while on vacation while others prefer to travel. Which do you prefer? Why? Give examples and reasons to support your position.

Many people leave their home country. Why? Give illustrations and reasons to support your argument.

Is it better to buy a product when you want it at the regular price or wait for the product when it is on sale? Use examples and reasons to argue your position.

In America, customers can return a purchased item for a full refund within thirty days. Do you agree or disagree with this policy? Develop your position with illustrations and reasons.

Do you agree or disagree. Every student should travel or work for a year being going to university or college. Support your argument using examples and reasons.

What Have You Learned?

In this chapter, you learned how to develop, revise and deliver spoken responses for paired-choice prompts using G+TiC=C and G+2TiC=C, and the four steps. By doing so, you can demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

#1 Make a G+TiC=C note map; include transitions.

#2 Read the prompt.

#3 Develop ideas (15 seconds).

#4 Speak (45 seconds).

Test-takers who get high independent speaking scores have practiced speaking a lot.

Speaking Task Three Integrated Task: Read-Listen-Speak For this task, you will integrate three skills: reading, listening and speaking.

You will integrate these skills when summarizing a students personal-opinion argument. The task order follows.

For this task, you must: take notes as you read and listen; summarize the main points in the reading and in the dialogue; synthesize the main points in the reading and in the dialogue; paraphrase the main points in the reading and in the dialogue.

You can develop and deliver a response for this task using G+3TiC=C. This argument map will help you take notes and give the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: a coherent integrated spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C.

ETSs Testing Method Understanding ETSs testing method for this task is the first step in delivering a coherent integrated spoken response. First, you will read a short announcement from a university. The announcement might be a new university policy. Next, you will listen to a dialogue in which two students argue about the new policy. One student will argue in support of the new policy while the other student argues against the new policy.

This method of testing is called argument-counter argument. ETS uses this same testing method for the argument-counter argument integrated essay.

Because ETS recycles the same testing method for this task, you can summarize the two arguments, then map out your response using G+3TiC=C.

Look at the following map. For this example, the reading announces that university parking fees are going up 20%. The woman tells the man that the fee increase is a good idea. That is her opinion, the start of her argument.

The man replies by saying that fee increase is a bad idea. That is his opinion, the start of his counter argument. Next, the woman will defend her opinion by giving her first reason. The man will counter the womans first reason with a counter reason. The two students will ping-pong (argue-counter argue) like this until the end.

Notice that these two arguments are really just two verbal independent essays (G+3TiC=C) connected by topic.

Does each student always give three supporting illustrations (G+3TiC=C)?

No. Sometimes there will be two supporting illustrations (G+2TiC=C).

Be prepared for three (G+3TiC=C).

As you listen to the two students arguing about the announcement in the reading, you must take notes and objectively summarize both arguments.

However, when you speak, you will summarize only one argument, either the pro or the con side, not both.

How will I know which argument to summarize?

After you read the announcement and listen to the dialogue, the prompt will tell you which argument to summarize.

Next, lets work through a sample response, step-by-step.

Developing a Response: Step-by-Step When developing and delivering a response for this task, use G+3TiC=C and the following five steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a note map; read and summarize the reading.

First, the narrator will describe the context and give instructions.

Narrator: Shelton University is planning to change its food service policy. Read the announcement about the change in policy. You have 45 seconds. Begin reading now.

As you listen to the narrator, make a note map. Put R for reading at the top.

Under R, put W for the womans argument and M for the mans argument.

Because time is limited, simply number each body paragraph.

When the narrator finishes speaking, a countdown clock will appear on your screen. The clock will countdown (45, 44, 42). Read the sample passage below.

Announcement from the President Starting next semester, all food sold at Shelton University will be organic. This will include all food prepared and served in the main cafeteria, as well as snacks bought in vending machines throughout campus. This policy also includes beverages as well, both hot and cold. When possible, the university will contract local growers to provide fresh organic produce. Student meal tickets will continue to be honored. The university is implementing this policy in order to regulate the sugar and fat content in student diets. This change in policy reflects health awareness programs being implemented at other colleges and universities across the nation.

As you read, summarize the passage under R on your note map. The first point to summarize is the main topic in the topic sentence. Summarize it objectively under R. Next, summarize those points that support the main topic. Those points are the reasons why the new policy is being introduced.

Step # 2 Listen to the dialogue; summarize both arguments.

When the reading ends, it will be replaced by the dialogue. It will last 60-90 seconds. On the next page, read along as you listen to two students arguing about the new food policy. As you listen, summarize each argument under M and W on your note map.

Narrator: Listen as two students discuss the announcement.

Man: Hi, Wendy.

Woman: Hey, Tom. Have you heard about the new organic food policy?

Man: Yeah. What a great idea. Its about time the school did something to improve the food around here.

Woman: If you ask me, I think the new policy is all wrong.

Man: Why?

Because organic food is way more expensive. In some cases, at least fifty per cent more. Add that to labor costs, you know, Woman: money to pay the cafeteria staff, and Im going to be paying a lot more for my coffee and the milk I put in it. I hate to think what a salad will cost. Organic may be cheaper in the future, but right now its for people with money not poor students like me.

But think of all the health benefits. Youll be eating food that Man: doesnt have any chemicals or antibiotics in it. Not only that but all that good organic food will be lower in fat and calories. I mean, thats got to be good, right?

Dont be fooled. A hamburger is a hamburger whether the meat is Woman: organic or not. Both will have the same amount of fat and calories. The only difference is the organic hamburger has no pesticides or antibiotics in it.

Well, I still think its a good idea. By offering organic food, well Man: be eating a lot better. Even the snacks in the vending machines will be organic. Its definitely the wave of the future. Best of all, well be helping local farmers.

What I dont like is the university telling us what we can and Woman: cant eat. Not everybody wants to eat organic, you know. If I want to eat non organic, thats my choice. Sorry, but the school should not be in the health care business.

Next, look at both arguments summarized in note form. Note the transitions of addition (first, next, finally) at the start of each body paragraph (TiC).

Do not summarize the entire reading passage, only the main points. If your summary of the reading is too long, you will run out of time summarizing the student argument.

When the 45 seconds are up, the reading passage will leave your screen. The reading passage will not return. Therefore, you must summarize it at this step.

Step #3 Read the prompt.

When the dialogue ends, it will leave your screen. You cannot replay it. The dialogue will be replaced by the prompt. The narrator will read it.

Prompt The woman states her opinion about the new university policy. Explain her opinion and the reasons she gives for maintaining that position.

Step #4 Prepare your response (30 seconds).

When the narrator stops reading the prompt, a countdown clock will count down (30, 29, 28). You will have 30 seconds to prepare your response.

Look at your map and begin to organize your ideas using G+3TiC=C.

Step #5 Speak (60 seconds).

When the countdown clock reaches zero, you will hear a Beep! Look at your note map. Start by summarizing the context in one sentence. The context introduces the main topic. When speaking, use the present tense, and speak objectively (He saysShe saysThey sayIt says), for example: Two students are discussing the new organic food policy at Shelton University.

Next, summarize the reading passage. First, identify the new policy (the main topic) and the reasons for the new policy.

Starting next semester, all the food at Shelton University will be organic. The university says that organic food will be healthier for the students and that other schools are making the same changes.

Next, summarize the womans argument.

Do not summarize both arguments. Only summarize the argument stated in the prompt, in this case, the womans argument.

The woman argues that the new policy is a bad idea.

First, she says that organic food is fifty percent more expensive than regular food. That means she will have to pay more for her coffee and salads. She says organic food is for rich people, not poor students like her.

Next, she says that organic food does not mean healthy food. For example, she says a regular hamburger and an organic hamburger have the same calories and fat. Organic food, she says, is not healthier.

Finally, she doesnt want the university telling her what she should eat. The university is taking away her freedom to choose. If she wants to eat regular food, that is her choice.

For those reasons, the woman is against the new food policy.

Mapped out, the structure of the womans response looks like this.

Mapped out, you can see how G+3TiC=C gives the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: a coherent integrated spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C. Note: Transitions (T) are in bold, the supporting illustration (i) in italics, the introduction, opinion (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

Do I have to speak for all 60 seconds? Is there some rule?

No. There is no rule that says you must speak continuously for 60 seconds.

You are demonstrating OPDUL=C. If you have demonstrated OPDUL=C in 50 seconds, great, just sit there and wait for the next task. While waiting, make a note map for speaking task four.

How Long Should My Response Be?

Using G+3TiC=C and speaking at a normal pace, you should be able to deliver a response that demonstrates OPDUL=C in 60 seconds. The following map illustrates approximate time divisions for each step of this task.

You are reading this example. On test day, you will pause and hesitate when you speak and thus use more time.

Next, check the sample response for OPDUL=C using the proficiency checklist.

Does the response demonstrate organization?

The speaker uses deduction as a method of organizing her argument.

This demonstrates organization. Yes No Does the response demonstrate progression?

Because the speaker is using deduction, the response progresses from general to specific. This demonstrates progression. Yes No _ a. Does the introduction demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker has summarized the main points in the reading and the main points in the womans argument with no points left out. This demonstrates introduction development-summarization. Yes No _ b. Does the body demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker has summarized the main points (3TiC) in the womans argument with no points left out. This demonstrates body development-summarization. Yes No _ c. Does the conclusion demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker restates the womans opinion in the conclusion. This demonstrates conclusion development-summarization. Yes No _ a. Does the response demonstrate topical unity-synthesis?

The speaker focuses on the new policy and why the woman argues against it. There are no topical digressions. This demonstrates topical unity-synthesis. Yes No _ b. Does the response demonstrate grammatical unity-synthesis?

The transitions of addition are correct. The connection between the reading summary and the womans argument is also clear. This demonstrate grammatical unity-synthesis. Yes No _ Does the response demonstrate proficient language use- paraphrasing?

The speaker objectively paraphrases the main points in the reading and the main points in the womans argument. There are no errors in syntax. This demonstrates proficient language-use paraphrasing. Yes No _ Delivery: We cannot evaluate the next three steps. However, when you practice in class, or alone with a recording device, ask these three questions.

a. Is the speakers fluency proficient?

Yes _ No _ b. Does the speaker demonstrate automaticity?

Yes _ No _ c. Is the speakers pronunciation proficient?

Yes _ No _ Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Does the response (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Because of Organization, Progression, Development-summarization, Unity -synthesis and Language Use-paraphrasing, the test-taker has proficiently summarized the points in the reading and shown how the womans argument opposes the new policy. This demonstrates coherence. (OPDUL=C). Yes No _ Note: When you practice speaking, use a recording device or get your classmates and instructor to help you with your revision checklist. After you identify areas that lack coherence, repeat the same response until the coherence level increases.

TASK: Go back and rate the response on page 225 using the Integrated Speaking Rating Guide on 324. Compare your rating to the one on page 341. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Five Common Problems Avoid these five problem areas when delivering your response.

1. Lack of Reading Passage Development-Summarization When you summarize the reading passage, make sure you identify the main topic and the reasons why the university is introducing the new policy.

A lack of reading passage development-summarization will result in a lack of topical unity-synthesis between the reading passage and the students argument. This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

2. Lack of Body Paragraph Development-Summarization When you summarize the students argument, make sure you identify the students opinion and each supporting illustration (3TiC). Make sure you identify the cause-and-effect relationship in each body paragraph as well.

They are the reasons that support the students opinion.

A lack of body paragraph development-summarization is a big reason why test-takers score low on integrated Speaking Task #3.

3. Summarizing Both Student Arguments Carefully read the prompt. Make sure you identify which students argument you must summarize. Do not summarize both. Summarizing the second student argument will be off topic. This will demonstrate a lack of topical unity-synthesis (OPDUL=C). The result will be a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

Make sure you summarize the students position as stated in the prompt.

4. Mixing Verb Tenses When you summarize objectively, use a consistent verb tense. If you start off using the simple present (The student says thatThe student argues that), do not change to the simple past (The student said thatThe student argued that).

Mixing verb tenses demonstrates a lack of unity-synthesis, specifically a lack of grammatical unity (OPDUL=C). This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

5. Stating Your Opinion For this task, do not state your opinion. This is an objective task. Your opinion is subjective. Stating your opinion will demonstrate a lack of topical unity-synthesis (OPDUL=C). This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

Help! - My Response is Too Long!

Listed below are reasons why your response is longer than 60 seconds.

Reason #1 Your summarization of the reading is too long.

Solution 1. Make your summarization shorter.

2. Do not include details (dates, scores, costs, etc).

3. Summarize the reading in 10 seconds or less.

4. Speak faster; try not to hesitate.

Reason #2 When the clock starts, you are not speaking right away. That means you are losing valuable seconds at the start.

Solution 1. Start speaking right after the beep. Remember: The speaking tasks come up fast. Be ready for them You are being too careful. When you are too careful, you Reason #3 slow down to pronounce correctly. When you slow down, you waste time. You also decrease fluency and automaticity.

1. Speak at a normal pace.

Solution 2. Record your voice, then play it back. You will know if you are speaking too slowly. If so, speak faster.

You are pausing or hesitating too much. Record your voice and play it back. You will soon know if you are pausing or Reason #4 hesitating too much. Pausing and hesitating wastes time.

Pausing and hesitating will also decrease fluency and automaticity.

1. Avoid pauses; try not to hesitate.

Solution 2. Practice reading sample responses.

3. Ask a native speaker to demonstrate the right speed.

Reason #5 You are pausing or hesitating too much because you did not summarize the student arguments using G+3TiC=C.

1. Memorize G+3TiC=C.

Solution 2. Practice summarizing student arguments using sample responses.

Reason #6 Your summarization of the students supporting illustrations (3TiC) contains too much information.

1. Identify the topic in each body paragraph and the reason Solution stated by the cause-and-effect relationship.

2. Do not include details (dates, scores, costs, etc).

Reason #7 Your conclusion is too long.

1. State your conclusion in one sentence.

Solution 2. State your conclusion in 5 seconds or less.

3. Simply repeat the students opinion.

Reason #8 The clock makes you so nervous you blank out.

Solution 1. Do not time yourself when you practice. Just speak.

When you are more confident, time yourself.

Help! - My Response is Too Short!

Listed below are reasons why your response is too short.

Reason #1 You are nervous. When you are nervous, you speak too fast and finish too soon.

1. Record your voice and play it back. You will soon know Solution if you are speaking too fast. If so, slow down.

2. Do not time yourself. Just speak at a regular speed.

Reason #2 Your summarization of the students supporting illustrations (3TiC) is too short.

Solution 1. Make sure you have identified the topic in each supporting example.

2. Make sure you have identified the cause-and-effect relationship in each example.

3. Make sure you have summarized all supporting examples.

Reason #3 You speak, then suddenly stop because you are shy or afraid, or feel stupid.

1. Practice reading into a recording device. Read an English magazine article or a book while recording. This will help you develop confidence speaking into a Solution microphone.

2. Take an ESL class to develop your speaking skills and confidence.

3. Practice. Practice. Practice.

Reason #4 You are not confident using G+3TiC=C.

1. Practice developing and delivering responses until you have memorized G+3TiC=C, and you remember it Solution automatically without notes.

2. Practice. Practice. Practice.

Reason #5 You blank out.

1. You are trying too hard or are too nervous. Try to relax.

When you practice speaking, dont time yourself, just speak until you are confident. When you are more Solution confident, then time yourself.

2. Forget about trying to demonstrate OPDUL=C. Just speak. The more you speak, the more confident you will become.

Start clean, end clean.

Emergency Response What if you cant deliver a response for this task? What if you blank out?

What should you do? Follow these four steps and deliver an emergency response.

Step #1 Make a G+3TiC=C note map.

Step #2 Read and summarize the passage (45 seconds).

Some test-takers blank out when they read the passage. If this happens, focus on the first and second sentences. These are the most important sentences. Sentence one is usually the topic sentence. If not, sentence two will be.

If you can only remember one point from the reading passage, make sure it is the main point. The main point is the topic sentence. The topic sentence will describe the new policy.

Step #3 Listen to the dialogue; summarize the two arguments.

Some test-takers blank out when they listen to the dialogue. If this happens, try to remember what each student said at the very start. For example, if the man starts by saying, What a great policy!, you know he supports the new policy. If the woman says, I dont believe it!, you know she does not support the policy.

Because the dialogue is short (60-90 seconds), each student will state his/her opinion about the new policy in the first few lines of dialogue.

Be ready for them. Each opinion will signal the start of each argument.

Tone (the emotion in a speakers voice) is a sign that will tell you what each student thinks. For example, if one student says, What a stupid policy!, this sentence will be expressed using a negative tone.

Conversely, What a good idea! will be expressed using a positive tone. Tone is one way of identifying a speakers opinion.

Also, read the prompt carefully. Make sure you understand it before you respond. Make sure you are on topic (talking about the topic in the prompt) not off topic (talking about a different topic).

Step #4 Speak (60 seconds).

When you speak, state the context first. Next, briefly describe the policy. If you cant remember the reason(s) for the policy, move on. Try and summarize the students opinion about the announcement. Look at your notes. If you have notes for the wrong student (the argument you dont have to summarize) use the black-and-white rule. Try and state the opposite of what is in your notes.

Speaking Practice TASK: Using G+3TiC=C and the four steps, develop and deliver a response for each of the following tasks. Use a recording device so you can play back your response and check it for coherence using the Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 322. After you check your response for coherence, rate it using the Integrated Speaking Rating Guide on page 324.

Task #1 Directions: Darien College has recently hired a new professor. Read the announcement. You have 45 seconds.

Announcement from the President It is with great pleasure that Darien College announces the appointment of Professor Abby Wright. Professor Wright is a world renown lecturer and writer. Her book of poems, Poems on the Plane, won the prestigious Ink Well Prize while her latest novel, Break the Fast, has been nominated for a Pulitzer Prize. Professor Wright graduated summa cum laude with a degree in English Literature from Princeton. She received her Masters in Comparative Mythology from Yale and her Ph.D. in Medieval Slovenian Literature from Harvard. Professor Wright also has a degree in law from Georgetown. Professor Wright will teach classes in Comparative Literature and Mythology, and will be available for student consultation. On behalf of Darien College, I extend a warm welcome to Professor Wright.

Next, listen as two students discuss the announcement.

After you listen to the dialogue, answer the prompt.

Prompt The man gives his opinion of the new professor. State his position and explain the reasons he gives for holding that opinion.

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #2 Directions; Wilton University seeks a new manager for its exercising facility. Read the announcement. You have 45 seconds.

Announcement from Student Services Wilton University seeks a student to manage the schools state-of-the-art exercising facility part time on weekday evenings and weekends. Preference will be given to those students in their graduating year and who have a background in sports management and/or health science. The qualified candidate will be responsible for opening and closing the facility, scheduling classes, such as yoga and pilates, and assisting those students and faculty members who need help. Knowledge of computer databases is essential, as is a GPA of no less than 3.0. For more information, please see Ivette in Student Services, Room A1.

Next, listen as two students discuss the announcement.

After you listen to the dialogue, answer the prompt.

Prompt The woman expresses her opinion about the announcement.

State her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for holding that opinion.

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #3 Directions: Greenwich College is introducing a student-of-the-year award.

Read the announcement. You have 45 seconds.

Announcement from the Dean Starting Monday, students at Greenwich College are invited to submit nominations for The Student-of-the-Year Award. The student of the year will best represent the school motto: Diligence and Desire. The winning student will receive a cash prize of $5,000.00 and laptop computer. The nominated student may be in any year and must be currently enrolled at Greenwich College. You may not nominate yourself. Voting will take place throughout the month. To vote, go to room 310 with your student ID card. Students not enrolled at Greenwich College cannot vote. If you have any questions, please contact the Deans office.

Next, listen as two students discuss the announcement.

After you listen to the dialogue, answer the prompt.

Prompt The man expresses his opinion about the announcement. State his opinion and explain the reasons he gives for maintaining that opinion.

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #4 Directions: Stamford College is introducing a new policy. Read the announcement. You have 45 seconds.

Announcement from the Dean Starting next semester, students at Stamford College will not be allowed to use laptop computers during class time. Any student using a laptop computer during class time will be asked to turn it off or leave the room. This policy is in response to complaints saying that increased laptop usage during class time is noisy and distracting. Laptop usage will be permitted in all main campus areas, including libraries and food service areas. If you have any questions regarding this policy, please feel free to contact the Dean.

Office hours are Monday-Friday 9 to 5pm.

Next, listen as two students discuss the new policy.

After you listen to the dialogue, answer the prompt.

Prompt The woman expresses her opinion about the new policy. State her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for maintaining that position.

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #5 Directions: New Canaan University is implementing a new policy. Read the announcement. You have 45 seconds.

Announcement from the President Starting next semester, all first and second year students will be required to live on campus in a dormitory. The university has recently finished construction of the Joan Lily Dormitory and the Dr. S. G. Shiloh Dormitory. These state-of-the-art dorms each contain 500 rooms with laundry facilities and exercising rooms in the basements. Each room has two beds and a small refrigerator. All rooms are internet ready, have card key locks, and provide wonderful views of Lake Barley. Rooms and roommates will be assigned on a first-come, first-served basis. The Dr. S. G. Shiloh dormitory is for male students only. The Joan Lily dormitory is for female students only. If you have any questions, please contact the university president.

Next, listen as two students discuss the new policy.

After you listen to the dialogue, answer the new policy.

Prompt The man expresses his opinion about the new policy. State his position and explain the reasons he gives for expressing that opinion.

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #6 Directions: Westport University is implementing a new policy. Read the announcement. You have 45 seconds.

Announcement from the Dean In celebration of this the Year of the Volunteer, Westport University is pleased to announce the following. Starting next semester, each student will be required to be a volunteer for one full semester.

Students may choose which organization they would like to volunteer for. Volunteering for work related to your major is recommended but not required. However, a minimum of four hours a week volunteering is required. You will receive credit for your work as a volunteer. The required minimum number of volunteer hours is forty-eight per student. Volunteering is a requirement for graduation. If you have any questions about this policy, please contact the Deans office.

Next, listen as two students discuss the new policy.

After you listen to the dialogue, answer the prompt.

Prompt The woman expresses her opinion about the new policy. State her opinion and explain the reasons she gives for expressing that opinion.

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

What Have You Learned?

In this chapter, you learned how to develop, revise and deliver integrated spoken responses using G+3TiC=C and the four steps. By doing so, you can demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

#1 Make a note map; summarize the reading (45 seconds).

#2 Summarize the dialogue (60-90 seconds).

#3 Read the prompt.

#4 Prepare your response (30 seconds).

#5 Speak (60 seconds).

Test-takers who get high integrated speaking scores have practiced speaking a lot.

Notes Speaking Task Four Integrated Task: Read-Listen-Speak Speaking task four is a fact-based argument. For this task, you will integrate three skills: reading, listening and speaking objectively. The task order follows.

For this task, you must: take notes as you read and listen; summarize the main points in the reading and in the lecture; synthesize the main points in the reading and in the lecture; paraphrase the main points in the reading and in the lecture.

You can develop and deliver a response for this task using G+3TiC=C. This argument map will help you take notes and give the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: a coherent integrated spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C (see the Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist page 322).

ETSs Testing Method Understanding ETSs testing method for this task is the first step in delivering a coherent integrated spoken response. Begin by reading the sample reading passage on the next page. You have 45 seconds.

Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active. Animals, such as horses, elephants and most birds, are said to be diurnal because they are active during the day and rest at night. Those animals active at dawn and dusk are said to be crepuscular. Beetles, skunks and rabbits fall into this category. The third group are those animals that sleep during the day and are active at night. They are called nocturnal. A good example is the bat. Bats have highly developed eyesight, hearing and smell. This helps them avoid predators and locate food. Being nocturnal also helps them avoid high temperatures during the day, especially in deserts where temperatures can reach well over one hundred degrees Fahrenheit.

Next, read along as you listen to a sample lecture on the same topic.

Good afternoon. In this lecture, well focus on a common nocturnal animal, the bat. There are two types of bat: micro bats, or true bats, and mega bats, also called fruit bats. Lets start with mega bats. Size wise, mega bats are from two to sixteen inches in length. Mega bats have extremely sensitive sight and smell. This helps them locate the flowers and fruit upon which they feed. It is while eating that mega bats play a important role in the distribution of plants. Like bees, mega bats serve as pollinators. When they lick nectar or eat flowers, their bodies become covered in pollen which they, in turn, carry to other trees and plants thereby acting as pollinators. In fact, many of the fruits and vegetables on our tables, such as bananas and peaches, would not be there if mega bats did not pollinate plants and trees.

Next are micro bats. As the name implies, micro bats are quite small, about the size of a mouse. To find food, micro bats use echolocation, high frequency sounds they bounce off insects. The most common micro bat is the vesper or evening bat. Like mega bats, micro bats play an important role in the environment. The average vesper bat, for example, can eat one thousand mosquitoes in one night. By doing so, they control the mosquito population.

In this lecture, the professor develops two examples of a nocturnal animal: the mega bat and the micro bat. These examples add to and support (develop) the premise in the reading: Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active.

Mapped out, you can see how the reading and the lecture are organized.

Notice how G is the premise, a general statement that introduces the main topic.

ETS uses this testing method for the show-support integrated essay as well.

Because ETS recycles the same testing method for this task, you can summarize the reading and the lecture, and map out your response using G+3TiC=C.

Are there always two lecture examples (2TiC) to support the reading?

No. Sometimes there is only one example (TiC). Sometimes there are two examples (2TiC). Sometimes three (3TiC). Be prepared for three examples.

Developing a Response: Step-by-Step When developing and delivering a response for this task, use G+3TiC=C and the following five steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a note map; read and summarize the reading.

First, the narrator will give instructions.

Narrator: Read the following passage on animal behavior.

You have 45 seconds. Begin reading now.

As you listen to the narrator, make a note map. Put R for reading at the top.

Under R, put L for lecture. Because time is limited, simply number each body paragraph.

When the narrator finishes speaking, a countdown clock will appear on your screen. The clock will countdown (45, 44, 43). As you read, look for signal words such as: definition define classify classificationprocess historical figure historical moment idea concept theory design These signal words will help you identify the premise.

Identifying the Main Topic Identifying and summarizing the premise is your first task. The premise is the main topic. It will be stated in the topic sentence. The premise will be expressed using a rhetorical strategy. For example, a date in the premised will signal the rhetorical strategy of narration. Narration, in turn, will signal the start of a general description of an historical person or event, for example: In 1878, Thomas Edison formed the Edison Electric Light Company in New York City.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of process.

Making microprocessors is a complicated process. First, you must The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of description.

J. D. Salinger, an eccentric recluse, penned The Catcher in the Rye, a coming-of-age novel in which a young hero rebels against the world.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of cause-and-effect.

Training a cat is next to impossible.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of definition.

Estrogen is a hormone found in both men and women.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of definition and cause-and-effect.

Estrogen is a hormone found in both men and women; however, its function in men is not entirely understood.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of classification.

Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active.

Read the sample passage once again. Notice how the premise is stated in the topic sentence and is identified by the rhetorical signal words can be classified followed by a description of the classifying process.

Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active. Animals, such as horses, elephants and most birds, are said to be diurnal because they are active during the day and rest at night. Those animals active at dawn and dusk are said to be crepuscular. Beetles, skunks and rabbits fall into this category. The third group are those animals that sleep during the day and are active at night. They are called nocturnal. A good example is the bat. Bats have highly developed eyesight, hearing and smell. This helps them avoid predators and locate food. Being nocturnal also helps them avoid high temperatures during the day, especially in deserts where temperatures can reach well over one hundred degrees Fahrenheit.

Next, summarize the reading under R on your note map. To summarize means to identify and generally describe the main points. In the sample reading, the main points are the premise (classifying animal behavior) and a general description of each animal classification.

Do not summarize every sentence in the reading. You will waste time. You only have 45 seconds. Only summarize the main topic.

The reading passage will not return after you read it. That means you must summarize it at this point.

Step #2 Listen to the lecture; summarize it.

When the reading ends, it will be replaced by the lecture. It will last 60-90 seconds.

Read along as you listen to the sample lecture. As you listen, summarize the main points of the lecture under L on your note map.

Narrator: Listen to a lecture on animal behavior.

Good afternoon. In this lecture, well focus on a common nocturnal animal, the bat. There are two types of bat: micro bats, or true bats, and mega bats, also called fruit bats. Lets start with mega bats. Size wise, mega bats range from two to sixteen inches in length. Mega bats have extremely sensitive sight and smell. This helps them locate the flowers and fruit upon which they feed. It is while eating that mega bats play a important role in the distribution of plants. Like bees, mega bats serve as pollinators. When they lick nectar or eat flowers, their bodies become covered in pollen which they, in turn, carry to other trees and plants thereby acting as pollinators. In fact, many of the fruits and vegetables on our tables, such as bananas and peaches, would not be there if mega bats did not pollinate plants and trees.

Next are micro bats. As the name implies, micro bats are quite small, about the size of a mouse. To find food, micro bats use echolocation, high frequency sounds they bounce off insects. The most common micro bat is the vesper or evening bat. Like mega bats, micro bats play an important role in the environment. The average vesper bat, for example, can eat one thousand mosquitoes in one night. By doing so, they control the mosquito population.

Next, look at the lecture notes. Notice the cause-and- effect relationship in the concluding sentence of each body paragraph (TiC).

Step #3 Read the prompt.

When the lecture ends, it will leave your screen. You cannot replay it. The lecture will be replaced by the prompt. The narrator will read it.

Prompt The reading and the lecture focus on the classification of animal behavior. Describe how the reading and the lecture define and develop this idea.

The prompt for this task can be phrased various ways, for example: Prompt The reading illustrates how animal behavior is classified. Show how the information in the lecture supports this classification.

Prompt According to the reading, animals can be classified by their behavior. How do the examples in the lecture develop and illustrate this point?

Prompt How does the lecture support and illustrate the classification of bats?

Translated, the previous four prompts all mean: Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they add to and support the information in the reading.

Step #4 Prepare your response (30 seconds).

When the narrator stops reading the prompt, a countdown clock will count down (30, 29, 28). You will have 30 seconds to prepare your response.

Look at your map and begin to organize your ideas using G+3TiC=C.

Step #5 Speak (60 seconds).

When the countdown clock reaches zero, you will hear a Beep! Look at your note map. Start speaking. Start by summarizing the reading followed by the lecture.

Mapped out, you can see how G+2TiC=C gives the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: a coherent integrated spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C. Note: Transitions (T) are in bold, the supporting illustration (i) in italics, the premise (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

How Long Should My Response Be?

Using G+2TiC=C or G+3TiC=C, and speaking at a normal pace, you should be able to deliver a response that demonstrates OPDUL=C in 60 seconds. The following map illustrates approximate time divisions for each step of this task.

You are reading the example on the next page. On test day, you will pause and hesitate when you speak and thus use more time.

Check the sample response for coherence using the OPDUL=C proficiency checklist.

Does the response demonstrate organization?

The speaker uses deduction as a method of organizing how the lecture adds to and supports the reading. This demonstrates organization.

Yes No _ Does the response demonstrate progression?

Because the speaker is using deduction, the response progresses from general to specific. This demonstrates progression. Yes No _ a. Does the introduction demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker has summarized the main points in the reading with no points left out. This demonstrates introduction development-summarization. Yes No _ b. Does the body demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker has summarized the main points in the lecture with no points left out. This demonstrates body development-summarization.

Yes No _ c. Does the conclusion demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker concludes by summarizing how the lecture supports the reading. This demonstrates development-summarization. Yes No _ a. Does the response demonstrate topical unity-synthesis?

The speaker demonstrates how the two bat examples in the lecture support the general description of animal behavior in the reading.

There are no topic digressions. This demonstrates topical unity-synthesis. Yes No _ b. Does the response demonstrate grammatical unity-synthesis?

The transition (The lecture says there are two kinds of bats: mega bats and micro bats.) between the lecture and the reading is clear and correct. The transitions within the lecture summary are also clear and correct. These combined demonstrate grammatical unity-synthesis.

Yes No _ Does the response demonstrate proficient language use- paraphrasing?

The speaker objectively paraphrases the main points in the reading and in the lecture. There are no errors in syntax or word choice. The speaker also demonstrates sentence variety, for example a complex sentence with an adverb clause of reason: This is good for the environment because new trees replace the old ones. The speaker also uses a complex sentence with an adverb clause of time: When they eat a flower, their bodies get covered with pollen which they carry to other flowers. These sentences demonstrate language-use paraphrasing. Yes No _ Delivery: We cannot evaluate the next three steps. However, when you practice in class, or alone with a recording device, ask these three questions.

a. Is the speakers fluency proficient?

Yes _ No _ b. Does the speaker demonstrate automaticity?

Yes _ No _ c. Is the speakers pronunciation proficient?

Yes _ No _ Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Does the response (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Because of Organization, Progression, Development-summarization, Unity-synthesis and Language use-paraphrasing, the speaker has proficiently demonstrated how the points made in the lecture add to and support the reading. This demonstrates coherence (OPDUL=C).

Yes No _ Note: When you practice constructing responses for this task, use a recording device or get your class and instructor to help you with your revision checklist. After you identify areas that lack coherence, repeat the same response until the coherence level increases.

TASK: Go back and rate the response on page 252 using the Integrated Speaking Rating Guide on page 324. Compare your rating to the one on page 341. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Four Common Problems Avoid these four problem areas when delivering a response for this task.

1. Lack of Reading Passage Development-Summarization When you summarize the reading passage, make sure you identify the main topic and accurately summarize it.

A lack of reading passage development-summarization will result in a lack of unity-synthesis, specifically topical unity between the reading and the lecture (OPDUL=C). This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

2. Lack of Body Paragraph Development-Summarization When you summarize the lecture, make sure you identify each supporting example (TiC). Make sure you also identify the cause-and-effect relationship. The cause-and-effect relationships are the reasons that support and develop each example which, in turn, add to and support the topic in the reading.

A lack of body paragraph development-summarization (OPDUL=C) is a big reason why test-takers score low on integrated speaking task four.

3. Mixing Verb Tenses When you objectively summarize, use the correct verb tense. If you start off using the simple present (The reading says thatThe lecture states that), do not change to simple past (The reading said thatThe lecture stated that).

Mixing verb tenses will demonstrate a lack of unity-synthesis, specifically a lack of grammatical unity (OPDUL=C). This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

4. Stating Your Opinion For this task, do not state your opinion. This is an objective task. Your opinion is subjective. Stating your opinion will demonstrate a lack of unity-synthesis, specifically topical unity (OPDUL=C). This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

Refer to the previous chapter for these topic areas.

Help! My Response is Too Long!

My Response is Too Short!

Emergency Response What if you cant deliver a response for this task? What if you blank out?

What should you do? Follow these three steps and deliver an emergency response.

Step #1 Make a note map; summarize the reading (45 seconds).

Some test-takers blank out when they read the passage. If this happens, read the passage again. Focus on the first sentence. It is usually the topic sentence. If the main topic is not in sentence two, then it will be in sentence three.

If you can remember only one point from the reading passage, make sure it is the main point in the topic sentence. The topic sentence will introduce the main topic of the passage. This topic will be developed by the examples in the lecture.

Step #2 Listen to the lecture; summarize it.

Some test-takers blank out when they listen to the lecture. If this happens, try and remember the specific supporting examples. They will be nouns identified by transitions of addition: i.e., For example, the mega bat or A good example is the polar bear. Topic nouns in the lecture will be directly related to the main topic in the reading. If you can remember the topic nouns in the lecture, there is a chance you will be able to develop at least one of them to demonstrate how it adds to and supports the topic in the reading.

Step #3 Speak (60 seconds).

If you remember the lecture better than the reading, start to summarize the lecture first. There is no rule that says you must start by summarizing the reading. As you summarize the lecture, there is a chance you will remember the main topic in the reading.

If you summarize the lecture first, make sure you connect it to the main topic in the reading with a transition.

Speaking Practice TASK: Using G+3TiC=C and the five steps, develop and deliver a response for each of the following tasks. Use a recording device so you can play back your response and check it for coherence using the Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 322. Rate each response using the Integrated Speaking Rating Guide on page 324.

Task #1 Directions: Read the passage about sharks. You have 45 seconds.

Sharks Sharks are a type of fish found in every ocean of the world. Instead of scales, sharks have a rough, sandpaper-like skin which protects them from parasites and reduces water resistance thus allowing them to move more efficiently through the water. Another unique feature of sharks is their skeletons. Instead of bones, sharks have cartilage, a type of connective tissue that allows for greater flexibility. As apex predators, sharks have good eye sight and exceptionally sensitive smell. Their eyes can see both mononocularly and stereoscopically while chemical sensitive tissues in the nose, called olfactory epithelium, can detect the smallest traces of blood miles away. All sharks are carnivorous. Some sharks, like the tiger shark, will eat just about anything. However, most sharks are more selective, such as the whale shark which feeds only on plankton, microscopic organisms on the bottom of the ocean food chain.

Next, listen to a lecture in a marine biology class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt The professor in the lecture describes the bull shark.

How does this information add to and support the information in the reading?

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #2 Directions: Read the passage about westerns. You have 45 seconds.

Westerns Romances, musicals, thrillers. Hollywood has made them all. However, the film that defines Hollywood is the western. The western is a nostalgic look back at the American frontier, a place where civilization ended and the wild west began. There are many sub genres of western; however, all westerns share the same main character: a man determined to be free at all costs. He might be an outlaw or sheriff, a rancher or a soldier.

Whatever his external description, he is, on the inside, a rebel, a man who follows no laws but his own. In short, the western is about a search for freedom. And if good triumphs over evil, so much the better. The western has faded in popularity, but its theme of individual freedom lives on. You just have to look at any number of space movies. If you look beyond the space ships and the laser guns, youll see that they are all westerns at heart.

Next, listen to a lecture in an American film class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt According to the reading, westerns continue to influence American movies. How do the examples in the lecture develop and illustrate this point?

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #3 Directions: Read the passage about Charles Darwin. You have 45 seconds.

Charles Darwin Charles Darwin is famous for his groundbreaking book On the Origin of Species published in 1851. In it, Darwin theorized that all organisms evolved through natural selection. Natural selection, as defined by Darwin, is the process in which an organism inherits traits that make it more likely to survive and successfully reproduce, and thus become more common. Darwin had witnessed this same process of selection in farmers breeding domestic livestock. By selective breeding, farmers could produce the results they were after, such as a cow that produced more milk or a sheep that produced more wool. Darwin analogized by observation that this same process of selection was naturally occurring in all organisms in the wild. However, it was the hand of nature, not the hand of man, that was doing the selecting. Darwins theory revolutionized scientific thought, for according to Darwin, natural selection proved that divine creation played no part in the creation and evolution of organisms.

Next, listen to a lecture in a biology class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt Summarize the points made in the lecture and show how they add to and support the information in the reading.

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #4 Directions: Read the passage about white collar crime. You have 45 seconds.

White Collar Crime Most of us have never heard of Professor Edwin Sutherland yet weve all heard the phrase white collar crime. This phrase was first coined by Sutherland in 1939 when he gave a presentation to the American Sociological Society. Sutherland had been studying two areas: crime and high society, specifically rich men who wore suits with ties and white shirts, hence the white collar analogy. Sutherland came to define white collar crime as a crime committed by a person of respectability and high social status in the course of his occupation. In other words, a white collar criminal could be a bank manager stealing money from his bank or a stockbroker giving false tips to inflate the price of a failing stock.

Next, listen to a lecture in a sociology class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt The reading and the lecture focus on white collar crime. Describe how the reading and the lecture define and develop this idea.

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #5 Directions: Read the passage about space. You have 45 seconds.

Space On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first satellite to orbit the earth. Thus began the space race. With Sputnik 1, the United States feared that the Soviet Union would eventually develop more powerful satellites that could spy or drop nuclear bombs on the United States. As a result, the United States made the control of space a top priority. However, on April 12, 1961 the Soviets once again beat America to the punch by putting the first man into earth orbit. Ten months later, America sent its first man into earth orbit. The space race ended when America landed men on the moon on July 16, 1969. Today, the exploration of space continues with the Space Shuttle making regular trips to the International Space Station where scientists from all around the world work together developing new technologies that might one day take us to Mars.

Next, listen to a lecture in an environmental class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt How do the reading and the lecture add to our understanding of the exploration of space? Use specific examples and reasons to explain.

TASK: You have 30 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

What Have You Learned?

In this chapter, you learned how to develop, revise and deliver integrated spoken responses for speaking task four using G+3TiC=C and the five steps. By doing so, you can demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

#1 Make a note map; summarize the reading (45 seconds).

#2 Summarize the lecture (60-90 seconds).

#3 Read the prompt.

#4 Prepare your response (30 seconds).

#5 Speak (60 seconds).

Test-takers who get high integrated speaking scores have practiced speaking a lot.

Speaking Task Five Integrated Task: Listen-Speak For this task, you will summarize the personal-opinion argument of a student. You will then comment about the students argument using your own personal-opinion argument. By doing so, you will combine the skills of listening and speaking. The task order follows.

For this task, you must: take notes as you listen to the dialogue; summarize the main points in the dialogue; synthesize your opinion with the main points in the dialogue; paraphrase the main points in the dialogue.

You can develop and deliver a response for this task using G+2TiC=C in combination with G+TiC=C. Together, G+2TiC=C and G+TiC=C will help you take notes and give the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: a coherent integrated spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C (see the Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist, page 322).

ETSs Testing Method Understanding ETSs testing method for this task is the first step in delivering a coherent integrated spoken response. Begin by reading along as you listen to the sample dialogue on the next page.

Man: Hi, Betty. Whats wrong?

Woman: Well, theres good news and bad.

Man: Okay, so whats the good news?

Woman: I got accepted into Harvard Law.

Man: Congratulations! Thats fantastic.

Woman: Thanks. Now for the bad news: Harvard is not cheap. I nearly died when I saw the tuition.

Man: Yeah, but its Harvard. Ivy League.

Woman: I know. I want to go, but I cant afford it. I already have four years worth of undergrad loans at this school. If I do three years of Harvard Law, Ill be even more in debt. Im not sure what to do.

Man: What about applying for a scholarship? How are your grades?

Woman: Im at the top of my class.

Man: There you go. Youd have a really good chance of getting a scholarship. Some scholarships pay all your tuition. If you dont get a full scholarship, you should at least get something for books. I got a scholarship here, and boy did I save a bundle.

Woman: Applying for a scholarship is definitely an option. Ill have to check it out.

Man: You could also take time off and work for a year or two, you know, postpone admittance. That way you could save money for tuition. You might not be able to pay off the full cost, but you could at least pay off some of it. That way youd owe less in the long run.

Woman: Yeah. Obviously, I have to make a decision.

In the dialogue above, notice how the woman has a problem: She was accepted by Harvard law, but the tuition is too high for her. Notice also that the man suggests two solutions to the womans problem. This testing method is called problem-solution.

There are always two suggested solutions to solve the problem described in the dialogue.

Mapped out, ETSs problem-solution testing method looks like this.

Next, look at the prompt. Notice that this is a two-task prompt. First, you must describe the problem, then you must state which solution you prefer and why.

Prompt: The students discuss solutions to the womans problem. Describe the problem, then state which solution you prefer and why.

1) When you describe the problem and the solutions, summarize them objectively using third person and the present tense (The woman says thatThe man recommends that) 2) When you state your opinion about which solution you prefer, speak subjectively in the present tense (I believe thatI think that).

When stating which solution you think is best, use your own experience for support. This will demonstrate development-summarization (OPDUL=C) and topic-unity synthesis (OPDUL=C).

Mapped out, you can see how you will use G+2TiC=C for your objective summary of the problem and the two solutions, and G+TiC=C when you subjectively state your solution preference.

Developing a Response: Step-by-Step When developing and delivering a response for this task, use G+2TiC=C and G+TiC=C, and the following five steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a Problem-Solution-Opinion note map.

First, the narrator will give instructions.

Narrator: For this task, you will listen to a dialogue between two students.

After you listen to the dialogue, you will summarize one of the students positions, then you will give your own opinion about the ideas presented. You will have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

As the narrator gives instructions, make a note map. Across the top, write P for problem, S for solutions, and O for your opinion. Under Solutions, map out G+2TiC=C. Under Opinion, map out G+TiC=C. Because time is limited, simply number each body paragraph.

Use transitions of addition to connect each body paragraph when you summarize the Solutions, and when you state your Opinion about the suggested solutions.

Step #2 Listen to the dialogue; summarize it (60-90 seconds).

When the narrator is finished giving instructions, you will hear the dialogue.

Read as you listen to the sample dialogue.

Student: Professor Morrison?

Professor: Hi, Sue. Come in. Whats up?

Student: I just wanted to remind you of the meeting tonight in Anderson Hall.

Professor: Meeting? What meeting?

Student: The Environmental Club meeting. You said youd come and give a talk about winning the National Science Prize.

Professor:: Tonight? Oh, no. I promised the Biology Club Id speak to them tonight in Farnell Hall.

Student: I see. But were expecting a big crowd. Weve been advertising it all month. We even sold tickets to raise money. I guess Ill just have to refund them.

Professor: Look, maybe we can work something out. You know, I could always record my talk to the Biology Club, then email you the file. That way you could present my talk to your group at your convenience.

Student: Yeah. That would work.

Professor: Also, Im part of a lecture tomorrow night over at Gethin-Jones Hall. The topic is ethics and nano engineering. You have to buy tickets. But since Im speaking, Im sure I can get you and your group in free. Id be willing to stay after and answer questions about the prize. What do you think?

Student: Thats a possibility too. Let me talk to my group first and see what they say.

When taking notes, identify the context first. The context introduces the speakers and the main topic. The problem will come right after the context.

On your note map, summarize the context and the problem under Problem The two solutions will come right after the description of the problem.

Next, summarize each solution under Solutions on your note map.

One solution = one body paragraph. Also, each body paragraph will contain a cause-and- effect relationship. The cause-and- effect relationship is the reason why this suggestion is a possible solution.

P S student reminds G professor about talking to the environmental club however professor 1 first professor could record his talk to bio club forgot meeting; he then email it to student student could present will talk to biology professors recorded talk to her club at her club instead convenience 2 second professor is part of a lecture tomorrow night; he can get student free tickets and talk to her club after about his prize that way he can keep promise C those are the solutions to the problem.

Step #3 Read the prompt.

After you listen to the dialogue, the prompt will appear on your screen. The narrator will read the prompt.

Prompt The professor and the student discuss solutions to the problem.

Identify the problem, then state which solution you think is best and why.

Step #4 Speak (60 seconds).

When the narrator stops speaking, the countdown clock will start (20, 19, 18). You will have 20 seconds to prepare your response.

On your note map, identify which solution you think is best. Because you will have no time to write out your position, look at the Solutions side of your note map and circle the solution you think is best.

Step #5 Speak (60 seconds).

When the countdown clock reaches zero, you will hear a Beep! Look at your note map. Start speaking. You will have 60 seconds. Start by summarizing the context and the problem.

When summarizing the context and the problem, speak objectively using third person and the present tense.

In the dialogue, a student from the Environmental Club reminds her professor that he is supposed to talk to her club about his prize. The student is expecting a big crowd.

However, there is a problem. The professor forgot about the meeting and is talking to the Biology Club instead.

Next, identify and summarize the two solutions. Continue to speak objectively.

The professor offers two solutions to the students problem.

First, he suggests that he can record his talk to the Biology Club, then email it to the Environmental Club.

That way the Environmental Club can watch his talk whenever they want.

Second, he suggests that the Environmental Club can see his lecture tomorrow night. The professor offers free tickets and says he will stay and talk to the club after about his prize. That way he can keep his promise.

Those are the two solutions to the students problem.

Next, state your personal-opinion argument using G+TiC=C. When you state your argument, identify and describe which solution you prefer and why.

When you deliver your argument, speak subjectively using the first person and the present tense.

If possible, use your own experience to support your solution preference, for example: Personally, I think that the professor should record his talk, then email it to the Environmental Club.

By doing so, the Environmental Club can watch the recording whenever they want. This is what I did when a professor of mine missed some classes. To stay on schedule, the professor recorded his lectures, then emailed them to all her students. It was great because I could watch the lectures as much as I wanted. By doing so, I got more out of them.

For those reasons, recording the talk is definitely the best solution.

Mapped out, you can see how G+2TiC=C and G+TiC= give the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: a coherent integrated spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C. Note: Transitions (T) are in bold, the supporting illustration (i) in italics, the general introduction-context and opinion (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

Keep your eye on the clock. For this task, there is a lot of information to squeeze into 60 seconds.

How Long Should My Response Be?

Using G+2TiC=C and G+TiC=C, and speaking at a normal pace, you should be able to deliver a response that demonstrates OPDUL=C in 60 seconds. The following map illustrates approximate time divisions for each step of this task.

You are reading the example. On test day, you will pause and hesitate when you speak and thus use more time.

Check the sample response for Coherence using the proficiency checklist.

Does the response demonstrate organization?

The speaker uses deduction as a method of organizing his summary of the problem and the solutions suggested. Also, the speaker uses deduction as a method of organizing his opinion and the reasons for why he thinks the recording solution is best. This demonstrates organization. Yes No _ Does the response demonstrateprogression?

Because the speaker uses deduction for both the summary of the dialogue and his opinion, both his objective summary and his subjective opinion progress from general to specific. This demonstrates progression. Yes No_ a. Does the introduction demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker has summarized the main points in the dialogue with no points left out. Also, the speaker has stated his opinion regarding which solution he thinks is best. The speakers opinion is arguable, supportable, a complete sentence and not a question. This demonstrates introduction development-summarization. Yes No_ b. Does the body demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker has summarized the main points in the dialogue with no points left out. Also, the speaker has developed his opinion with reasons explaining why he thinks recording the talk is the best solution. This demonstrates development-summarization. Yes No _ c. Does the conclusion demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker concludes the dialogue summary with a restatement of the topic sentence. Also, in his argument, the speaker restates his opinion in his conclusion for why recording is the best solution. This demonstrates conclusion development-summarization. Yes No _ a. Does the response demonstrate topical unity-synthesis?

The speaker demonstrates how the summary of the problem-solutions and his argument are topically united. He does so by focusing on which solution he thinks is best from the two suggested solutions in the dialogue summary. Also, there are no topic digressions. This demonstrates topical unity-synthesis. Yes No _ b. Does the response demonstrate grammatical unity-synthesis?

The topic-sentence transition between the dialogue summary and the speakers argument is correct. The transitions within both the dialogue summary and the speakers argument are also correct. This demonstrates grammatical unity-synthesis. Yes No_ Does the response demonstrate proficient language use- paraphrasing?

The speaker objectively paraphrases the main points in the dialogue.

There are no errors in syntax or word choice. Also, the speaker summarizes the dialogue using third person singular and the present tense, and states his argument subjectively using the first person singular and the present tense. This demonstrates proficient demonstrates language-use paraphrasing. Yes No _ Delivery: We cannot evaluate the next three steps. However, when you practice in class, or alone with a recording device, ask these three questions.

a. Is the speakers fluency proficient?

Yes_No_ b. Does the speaker demonstrate automaticity?

Yes_No_ c. Is the speakers pronunciation proficient?

Yes_No_ Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Does the response (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Because of Organization, Progression, Development-summarization, Unity synthesis and Language Use-paraphrasing, the speaker has proficiently identified and summarized the problem in the dialogue and the solutions. The speaker has also stated which solution is best and why. This demonstrates coherence (OPDUL=C). Yes No _ Note: When you practice constructing responses for this task, use a recording device or get your class and instructor to help you with your OPDUL=C revision checklist. After you identify areas that lack coherence, repeat the same response until the coherence level increases.

TASK: Go back and rate the response on page 273 using the Integrated Speaking Rating Guide on page 324. Compare your rating to the one on page 341. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Contrarian Response What if you think the suggested solutions are not good enough? What if you have a better solution? Can you state it? Yes. In this case, your solution is contrary to the suggested solutions. This type of strategy is called a contrarian response. Look at the following contrarian response.

Personally, I think that the professors solutions are not good enough. The Environmental Club will be disappointed because he did not bother to check his schedule. If students do not check their schedules, they can get into a lot of trouble. The best solution is for the professor to reschedule his talk with the Environmental Club. By doing so, he will keep his promise and set a good example.

In the previous sample response, the speaker is arguing against the suggested solutions. More importantly, the speaker offers a new solution.

Make sure your contrarian solution is serious. Avoid this type of response.

I cant believe the professor BROKE HIS PROMISE!!!

Thats not very nice. And hes a professor?! Personally, I would have absolutely no respect for him after that! If bought a ticket, I would be VERY MAD!!!

As you can see, the above response is not serious. The speaker is not arguing. The speaker is simply complaining and FLAMING. Worse, the speaker does not offer a solution to the problem. This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

Three Common Problems Avoid these three problem areas when delivering a response for this task.

1. Lack of Context-Problem Development-Summarization When you summarize the dialogue, make sure you accurately identify the context and the problem.

A lack of context-problem development-summarization will result in a lack of unity-synthesis (OPDUL=C), specifically topical unity between the dialogue and your argument stating which solution you think is best. This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

2. Lack of Body Paragraph Development-Summarization When you summarize the dialogue, identify each supporting example (TiC).

Each example is a solution to the problem. Also, make sure you identify the cause-and-effect relationship in each solution. The cause-and-effect relationships are the reasons that support and develop each solution. This in turn, will help you develop your argument in which you state which solution you think is best.

A lack of development-summarization, particularly of the two solutions in the dialogue, is a big reason why test-takers score low on integrated speaking task five.

3. Mixing Verb Tenses When you objectively summarize the dialogue and subjectively state your argument, make sure you use a consistent verb tense. If you start off using the simple present (The problem is), dont change to simple past (Personally, I think that the best solution was) Be consistent. Use either simple present or simple past.

Mixing verb tenses will demonstrate a lack of unity-synthesis (OPDUL=C), specifically a lack of grammatical unity. This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

Help!  My Response is Too Long!

Listed below are reasons why your response is longer than 60 seconds.

Reason #1 Your summarization of the context-problem is too long.

Solution 1. Make your summarization shorter.

2. Avoid details like dates, places, costs, etc.

3. Summarize the context-problem in 15 seconds or less.

4. Speak faster; try not to hesitate.

Reason #2 When the clock starts, you are not speaking right away. That means you are losing valuable seconds at the start.

Solution 1. Start speaking right after the beep. Remember: The speaking tasks come up fast. Be ready for them Reason #3 You are being too careful. When you are too careful, you slow down to pronounce correctly. When you slow down, you waste time. You also decrease fluency and automaticity.

Solution 1. Speak at a normal pace.

2. Record your voice, then play it back. You will know if you are speaking too slowly. If so, speak faster.

Reason #4 You are pausing or hesitating too much. Record your voice and play it back. You will soon know if you are pausing or hesitating too much. Pausing and hesitating wastes time.

Pausing and hesitating will also decrease fluency and automaticity.

Solution 1. Avoid pauses; try not to hesitate.

2. Practice reading sample responses.

3. Ask a native speaker to demonstrate the right speed.

Reason #5 You are pausing or hesitating too much because you did not summarize the dialogue using G+2TiC=C.

Solution 1. Practice summarizing sample dialogues using G+2TiC=C.

2. Practice one response over and over until you are confident summarizing a dialogue using G+2TiC=C.

Reason #6 Your summarization of the solutions contains too much information.

Solution 1. Identify only the topic in each solution and the cause-and-effect relationship.

2. Reduce the number of specific details (dates, costs, ages, etc).

Reason #7 You are summarizing each solution, then explaining why it is not a good idea.

Solution 1. Do not analyze each solution in detail and explain why you think it is not a good idea. This will waste time.

2. Summarize each solution only.

3. State your argument (solution preference) at the end.

Reason #8 Your conclusion of the dialogue summary is too long.

Solution 1. State the conclusion in one sentence.

2. State the conclusion in 5 seconds or less.

Reason #9 Your argument (G+TiC=C) is too long.

Solution 1. Reduce the number of solutions you prefer.

2. Develop only one solution. Remember: One well- developed solution is better than two solutions that lack development.

3. State your argument in 20 seconds or less.

Reason #10 The clock makes you so nervous you blank out.

Solution 1. Do not time yourself when you practice. Just speak. When you are more confident, time yourself.

Help!  My Response is Too Short!

Listed below are reasons why your response is too short.

Reason #1 You are nervous. When you are nervous, you speak too fast and finish too soon.

Solution 1. Record your voice and play it back. You will soon know if you are speaking too fast. If so, slow down.

2. Do not time yourself. Just speak at a regular speed.

Reason #2 You speak, then suddenly stop because you are shy or afraid, or feel stupid.

Solution 1. Practice reading into a recording device. Read an English magazine article or a book while recording. This will help you develop confidence speaking into a microphone.

2. Take an ESL class to develop your speaking skills and confidence.

3. Practice. Practice. Practice.

Reason #3 You are not confident using G+2TiC=C.

Solution 1. Practice developing and delivering one response until you have memorized G+2TiC=C and can remember it automatically without notes.

2. Practice. Practice. Practice.

Reason #4 You blank out.

Solution 1. You are trying too hard or are too nervous. Try to relax.

When you practice speaking, dont time yourself, just speak until you are confident. When you are more confident, then time yourself.

2. Dont worry about fluency, automaticity and pronunciation, just speak. The more you speak, the more confident you will become.

Reason #5 Your summarization of the context-problem is too short.

Solution 1. Make sure you have accurately identified the context and the problem.

Reason #6 Your summarization of the solutions is too short.

Solution 1. Make sure you have accurately identified and summarized each solution.

2. Make sure you have identified the cause-and-effect relationship in each solution.

Reason #7 Your argument is too short.

Solution 1. Identify which solution you think is best.

2. Develop your argument with a cause-and-effect reason.

Start clean, end clean.

Emergency Response What if you cant develop and deliver a response for this task? What if you blank out? What should you do? Follow these two steps and deliver an emergency response.

Step #1 Identify the problem; summarize the problem.

After you listen to the dialogue, look at your note map. Try and identify the Problem. The problem is the most important part of this task. If you can identify the problem, you might be able to remember the solutions.

If you can remember only one point from the dialogue, make sure it is the problem.

Step #2 Suggest solutions to the problem.

If you can only remember the problem, and not the solutions, then offer your own solutions to the problem. There is a chance they might be similar to the two solutions suggested.

Dont stop talking. The more you talk, the more you think. The more you think, the more you might remember the solutions.

Speaking Practice TASK: Using G+2TiC=C and G+TiC=C and the five steps, develop and deliver a response for each of the following tasks. Use a recording device so you can play back your response and check it for coherence using the Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 322. After you check your response for coherence, rate it using the Integrated Speaking Rating Guide on page 324.

Task #1 Directions: Listen to a conversation between two students.

After you listen to the conversation, answer the prompt.

Prompt The students discuss two solutions to the womans problem.

Identify the problem and the solutions, then state which solution you think is best and why.

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #2 Directions: Listen to a conversation between two students.

After you listen to the conversation, answer the prompt.

Prompt The students discuss two solutions to the mans problem. Identify the problem and the solutions, then state which solution you prefer and why.

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #3 Directions: Listen to a conversation between two students.

After you listen to the conversation, answer the prompt.

Prompt ;The students discuss two solutions to the womans problem.

Identify the problem and the solutions, then state which solution you prefer and why.

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #4 Directions: Listen to a conversation between two students.

After you listen to the conversation, answer the prompt.

Prompt ; The students discuss two solutions to the mans problem.

Identify the problem and the solutions, then state which solution you prefer and why.

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #5 Directions: Listen to a conversation between two students.

After you listen to the conversation, answer the prompt.

Prompt The students discuss two solutions to the womans problem.

Identify the problem and the solutions, then state which solution you prefer and why.

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

What Have You Learned?

In this chapter, you learned how to develop, revise and deliver integrated spoken responses for speaking task five using G+3TiC=C and G+2TiC=C, and the five steps. By doing so, you can demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

#1 Make a Problem-Solution-Opinion note map.

#2 Listen to the dialogue; summarize it (60-90 seconds).

#3 Read the prompt.

#4 Prepare your response (20 seconds).

#5 Speak (60 seconds).

Test-takers who get high integrated speaking scores have practiced speaking a lot.

Notes Speaking Task Six Integrated Task: Listen-Speak Speaking task six is a verbal, fact-based argument. For this task, you will integrate two skills: listening and speaking objectively. The task order follows.

For this task, you must: take notes as you listen to the lecture; summarize the main points in the lecture; paraphrase the main points in the lecture.

You can develop and deliver a response for this task using G+3TiC=C. This argument map will help you take notes and give the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: a coherent integrated spoken response that proficiently demonstrates OPDUL=C (see the Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist, page 322).

ETSs Testing Method To understand ETSs testing method for this task, refer back to Speaking Task #4. For Speaking Task #4, you will read a short academic passage, then listen to a short lecture on the same topic. As you know, the reading gives a general introduction to the topic. That topic is developed with specific example in the lecture. You then integrate the reading (general) and the lecture (specific) by objectively summarizing them. ETS recycles this same testing method for Speaking Task #6. However, for Speaking Task #6, the general and the specific are combined in one lecture, as the maps on the next page illustrate.

Below, you can see how the lecture adds to and supports the reading in speaking task four and in the show-support integrated essay.

For speaking task six, the general and the specific are combined in the lecture. Use the following map to develop and deliver your response for speaking task six.

ETS recycles the same testing methods throughout the speaking and writing sections. Because ETS recycles the same testing methods, they are predictable. Because they are predictable, you can apply G+3TiC=C and its variations (G+TiC, G+TiC=C, G+2TiC=C) to all six speaking tasks and to both writing tasks. By doing so, you will demonstrate OPDUL=C for all eight tasks.

Developing a Response: Step-by-Step When developing and delivering a response for this task, use G+3TiC=C and the following five steps to demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

Step #1 Make a G+3TiC=C note map.

First, the narrator will give instructions.

Narrator: For this task, you will listen to a lecture on an academic topic. After you listen to the lecture, you will summarize the main points. You will have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

As the narrator gives instructions, make a note map. Because time is limited, simply number each body paragraph instead of writing TiC.

Use transitions of addition when connecting each body paragraph when you speak.

Step #2 Listen to the lecture (2-3 minutes).

When the narrator is finished, you will listen to the lecture.

Read along as you listen to a sample lecture.

Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active. Animals, such as horses, elephants and most birds, are said to be diurnal because they are active during the day and rest at night. Those animals active at dawn and dusk are said to be crepuscular. Beetles, skunks and rabbits fall into this category. The third group are those animals that sleep during the day and are active at night. They are called nocturnal. A good example is the bat. Bats have highly developed eyesight, hearing and smell. This helps them avoid predators and locate food. Being nocturnal also helps them avoid high temperatures during the day, especially in deserts where temperatures can reach well over one hundred degrees Fahrenheit. There are two types of bat: micro bats, or true bats, and mega bats, also called fruit bats. Lets start with mega bats.

Size wise, mega bats range from two to sixteen inches in length.

Mega bats have extremely sensitive sight and smell. This helps them locate the flowers and fruit upon which they feed. It is while eating that mega bats play an important role in the distribution of plants. Like bees, mega bats serve as pollinators. When they lick nectar or eat flowers, their bodies become covered in pollen which they, in turn, carry to other trees and plants thereby acting as pollinators. In fact, many of the fruits and vegetables on our tables, such as bananas and peaches, would not be there if mega bats did not pollinate plants and trees.

Next are micro bats. As the name implies, micro bats are quite small, about the size of a mouse. To find food, micro bats use echolocation, high frequency sounds they bounce off insects. The most common micro bat is the vesper or evening bat. Like mega bats, micro bats play an important role in the environment. The average vesper bat, for example, can eat one thousand mosquitoes in one night. By doing so, they control the mosquito population.

Identifying the Main Topic Identifying and summarizing the premise is your first task. The premise will be stated in the topic sentence. The premise will be expressed using a rhetorical strategy. For example, a date in the premise will signal the rhetorical strategy of narration. Narration, in turn, will signal the start of a general description of an historical person or event, for example: In 1793, Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin and revolutionized the cotton industry in the American south.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of process.

Extracting DNA from old bones is a complicated and time-consuming process.

First, you must The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of description.

The biggest great white shark ever caught was 21.3 feet long and weighed over 7,000 pounds.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of cause-and-effect.

Exercising reduces stress.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of compare-and-contrast.

In the mid-nineteenth century, two diametrically opposite art movements emerged: Impressionism in France and the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood in England.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of definition.

The TOEFL iBT is an English language proficiency test.

The premise might also employ the rhetorical strategy of classification, as does the premise in the topic sentence in the sample lecture.

Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active. Animals, such as horses, elephants and most birds, are said to be diurnal because After you identify the main topic, summarize it on your note map. To summarize means to identify and generally describe the main points. The main points are the premise and, in this example, a general description of each animal classification.

G animal behavior classified according to time of day day is diurnal  eat during day, sleep at night, humanshorses, elephants twilight is crepuscular  active dawn and dusk, beetles, rabbits, skunks night is nocturnal  sleep during day, active at night General to Specific The premise (general) will be followed by supporting illustrations (specific) identified by transitional signal words or topic nouns.

In this lecture, notice how the general nocturnal animal transitions into the specific the bat, which is divided (classified) into two specific sub groups. The sub groups are the supporting illustrations (2TiC). They, in turn, develop the topic nocturnal animal. This demonstrates organization (OPDUL=C), progression (OPDUL=C), topical unity-synthesis (OPDUL=C), and coherence (OPDUL=C).

Next, summarize the supporting illustrations and conclusion. Notice the transitions of contrast (TiC) and the cause-and-effect relationship (TiC) in each body paragraph.

1 first mega bats, 2-16 inches good eyesight and smell, helps bat find food = flowers and fruit like bees mega bats pollinate plants + tree good for environment, we get peaches, bananas 2 next micro bats, size of mouse use echolocation to find food = insects micro bats eat 1,000 mosquitoes a night good for controlling mosquitoes 3 also C These examples add to and support the reading Does the lecture always develop the premise with two supporting illustrations?

The number of supporting illustrations depends on the premise of the lecture, and the rhetorical strategy used to define and develop the premise. That said, there could be one, two, or three supporting illustrations. A lecture that might use three examples might define the premise using the rhetorical strategy of description, for example: Early in his career, Picasso moved through three stylistic periods: Blue, Rose, and African.

In this example, each of Picassos three artistic periods can be developed into a body paragraph.

A lecture that uses process to define the premise could also give three supporting examples (3TiC), for example: The traditional way to write an essay is a three-step process: brainstorming, writing, revising.

In this example, each step in the writing process would be a supporting illustration.

In the next example, the premise is defined by the rhetorical strategies of classification, illustration, process, and cause-and-effect.

The psychologist Abraham Maslow believed that humans are motivated by unsatisfied needs. According to Maslow, we all have general needs, such as physiological, survival and love. As we satisfy each need, Maslow claims we are moving toward greater self-actualization.

In this example, you might be asked to summarize how each need (classification-illustration) helps us move (process) toward greater self-actualization (cause-effect).

The structure of the lecture progresses from general to specific regardless of the topic or the number of supporting illustrations.

Step #3 Read the prompt; prepare your response (20 seconds).

When the lecture ends, it will leave your screen. You cannot replay it. The lecture will be replaced by the prompt. The narrator will read it.

The prompt for this task can be phrased many different ways, for example: Prompt ;The lecture illustrates how animal behavior is classified.

Show how the information in the lecture supports this classification.

Prompt ; Summarize the main points in the lecture and show how bats are an important part of the environment.

Prompt ;According to the lecture, bats are a critical part of the environment. How do the examples in the lecture develop and illustrate this point?

Translated, these three prompts all mean: Prompt ; Identify and summarize the main topic in the lecture and show how that topic is developed and supported by specific examples.

Step #4 Prepare your response (20 seconds).

After the narrator reads the prompt, you will have 20 seconds to prepare your response. The countdown clock will countdown (20, 19, 18).

Step #5 Speak (60 seconds).

When the countdown clock reaches zero, you will hear a Beep! Look at your note map. Start speaking.

Prompt ;Summarize the main points in the lecture and show how bats are an important part of the environment.

Mapped out, you can see how G+2TiC=C gives the speaking raters what they are trained to listen for: a coherent integrated spoken response that demonstrates OPDUL=C. Note: Transitions (T) are in bold, the supporting illustration (i) in italics, the premise (G) and the conclusions (C) underlined.

How Long Should My Response Be?

The following map illustrates approximate time divisions for each step of this task. Remember: You are reading the example. On test day, you will pause and hesitate when you speak thus use more time.

Next, check the sample response for OPDUL=C.

Does the response demonstrate organization?

The speaker uses deduction as a method of summarizing the main points in the lecture. This demonstrates organization. Yes No_ Does the response demonstrate progression?

Because the speaker is using deduction, the response progresses from general to specific. This demonstrates progression. Yes No_ a. Does the introduction demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker has summarized the general classification of animal behavior, and under which classifications bats fall. This demonstrates introduction development-summarization. Yes No_ b. Does the body demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker has summarized two specific types of bat and illustrated how they are good for the environment. This demonstrates body development-summarization. Yes No_ c. Does the conclusion demonstrate development-summarization?

The speaker concludes by summarizing how bats are good for the environment. Yes No _ a. Does the response demonstrate topical unity-synthesis?

The speaker focuses on animal classification in general and two types of bat in specific with no topic digressions. This demonstrates topical unity-synthesis. Yes No_ b. Does the response demonstrate proficient grammatical unity- synthesis?

The transition between the general and the specific is clear and correct.

All other transitions are clear and correct. This demonstrates grammatical unity-synthesis. Yes No _ Does the response demonstrate proficient language use- paraphrasing?

The speaker objectively paraphrases the main points and the supporting points with no points left out. This demonstrates proficient language-use paraphrasing. Yes No_ Delivery: We cannot evaluate the next three steps. However, when you practice in class, or alone with a recording device, ask these three questions.

a. Is the speakers fluency proficient?

Yes _ No _ b. Does the speaker demonstrate automaticity?

Yes _ No _ c. Is the speakers pronunciation proficient?

Yes _ No _ Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Does the response (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Because of Organization, Progression, Development-summarization, Unity-synthesis and Language Use-paraphrasing, the speaker has proficiently summarized the main points in the lecture and demonstrated how bats are a critical part of the environment. This demonstrates coherence (OPDUL=C). Yes No_ Note: When you practice constructing responses, use a recording device or get your class and instructor to help you with your revision checklist. After you identify areas that lack coherence, repeat the same response until the coherence level increases.

TASK: Go back and rate the response on page 296 using the Integrated Speaking Rating Guide on page 324. Compare your rating to the one on page 341. Note: For this response, the speakers delivery was proficient.

Three Common Problems Avoid these three problem areas when delivering a response for this task.

1. Lack of General Development-Summarization When you summarize the lecture, make sure you identify the main topic and how it is developed either by definition, process, classification, narration, description or cause-and-effect, etc.

A lack of general development-summarization (OPDUL=C) will result in a lack of unity-synthesis (OPDUL=C), specifically topical unity between the general (G) and the specific (3TiC). This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

2. Lack of Specific Development-Summarization When you summarize the lecture, make sure you identify the correct number of supporting illustrations (TiC, 2TiC, 3TiC). Also, make sure you identify the cause-and-effect relationship in each. The cause-and-effect relationships are the reasons that support and develop each example which, in turn, add to and support the general topic.

A lack of specific development-summarization (OPDUL=C) will result in a lack of unity-synthesis (OPDUL=C), specifically topical unity between the general (O) and the specific (3TiC). This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

3. Mixing Verb Tenses When you summarize the lecture, make sure you use the correct verb tense.

If you start off using the simple present (The lecture says that), do not change to simple past (The lecture said that) Mixing verb tenses demonstrates a lack of unity-synthesis, specifically a lack of grammatical unity (OPDUL=C). This will result in a lack of coherence (OPDUL=C) and a lower score.

Help!  My Response is Too Long!

Listed below are reasons why your response is longer than 60 seconds.

Reason #1 Your summarization of the general topic is too long.

Solution 1. Make your summarization shorter.

2. Avoid details like dates, places, costs, etc.

3. Speak faster; try not to hesitate.

Reason #2 When the clock starts, you are not speaking right away. That means you are losing valuable seconds at the start.

Solution 1. Start speaking right after the beep. Remember: The speaking tasks come up fast. Be ready for them.

Reason #3 You are being too careful. When you are too careful, you slow down to pronounce correctly. When you slow down, you waste time. You also decrease fluency and automaticity.

Solution 1. Speak at a normal pace.

2. Record your voice, then play it back. You will know if you are speaking too slowly. If so, speak faster.

Reason #4 You are pausing or hesitating too much. Record your voice and play it back. You will soon know if you are pausing or hesitating too much. Pausing and hesitating wastes time.

Pausing and hesitating will also decrease fluency and automaticity.

Solution 1. Avoid pauses; try not to hesitate.

2. Practice reading the sample responses.

3. Ask a native speaker to demonstrate the right speed.

Reason #5 You are pausing or hesitating too much because you did not summarize the lecture using G+3TiC=C.

Solution 1. Memorize G+3TiC=C.

2. Practice one response over and over until you are confident summarizing the lecture using G+3TiC=C.

Reason #6 Your summarization of the lecture contains too much information.

Solution 1. Identify only the main topic in each supporting illustration and the supporting illustrations.

2. Reduce the number of details (dates, costs, ages, etc).

Reason #7 The conclusion is too long.

Solution 1. State the conclusion in one sentence.

2. State the conclusion in 5 seconds or less.

Reason #8 The clock makes you so nervous you blank out.

Solution 1. Do not time yourself when you practice. Just speak. When you are more confident, time yourself.

Help! - My Response is Too Short!

Listed below are reasons why your response is too short.

Reason #1 You are nervous. When you are nervous, you speak too fast and finish too soon.

Solution 1. Record your voice and play it back. You will soon know if you are speaking too fast. If so, slow down.

2. Do not time yourself. Just speak at a regular speed.

Reason #2 Your summarization of the lecture is too short.

Solution 1. Make sure you have identified the main topic in the general introduction.

2. Make sure you have identified the each supporting illustration in the body.

Reason #3 You speak, then suddenly stop because you are shy or afraid, or feel stupid.

Solution 1. Practice reading into a recording device. Read an English magazine article or a book while recording. This will help you develop confidence speaking into a microphone.

2. Take an ESL class to develop your speaking skills and confidence.

3. Practice. Practice. Practice.

Reason #4 You are not confident using G+3TiC=C.

Solution 1. Practice developing and delivering one response until you have memorized G+3TiC=C and can remember it automatically without notes.

2. Practice. Practice. Practice.

Reason #5 You blank out.

Solution 1. You are trying too hard or are too nervous. Try to relax.

When you practice speaking, dont time yourself, just speak until you are confident. When you are more confident, then time yourself.

2. Dont worry about fluency, automaticity and pronunciation, just speak. The more you speak, the more confident you will become.

Start clean, end clean.

Emergency Response What if you cant deliver a response for this task? What if you blank out?

What should you do? Follow these two steps and deliver an emergency response.

Step #1 Identify the main topic (20 seconds).

After you listen to the lecture, look at your note map. Try and identify the main topic. The main topic is the most important part of this task. If you can identify the main topic, you might be able to remember the premise and the supporting illustrations.

If you can remember only one point from the lecture, make sure it is the main topic.

Step #2 Speak (60 seconds).

If you can only remember the main topicand not the supporting illustrationsthen develop the main topic only.

Dont stop talking. The more you talk, the more you think. The more you think, the more you might remember the main topic and the supporting illustrations.

Speaking Practice TASK: Develop and deliver responses for each of the following tasks using G+3TiC=C. If you are practicing alone, record your response, then check it for OPDUL=C using the Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist on page 322. Rate your response using the Integrated Speaking Rating Guide on page 324. If you are practicing in a class, get your classmates and instructor to check and rate your response.

Task #1 Directions: Listen to a lecture in a law class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt The lecture examines the issue of defamation.

How is libel different from slander? Develop your summary with details from the lecture.

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #2 Directions: Listen to a lecture in a geology class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt The lecture describes two types of earthquake.

Define each and illustrate their destructive power.

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #3 Directions: Listen to a lecture in a womens studies class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt The lecture talks about HRT (hormone replacement therapy). Summarize the recent history of HRT usage in America and its impact on womens health.

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #4 Directions: Listen to a lecture in a biology class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt The lecture explores the issue of invasive species. Identify the main points in the lecture and illustrate why feral hogs are a growing problem.

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare your response and 60 seconds to speak.

Task #5 Directions: Listen to a lecture in a business class.

After you listen to the lecture, answer the prompt.

Prompt The lecture discusses the various types of taxation in America. What are they? Which is the least popular with Americans, and why?

TASK: You have 20 seconds to prepare you response and 60 seconds to speak.

What Have You Learned?

In this chapter, you learned how to develop, revise and deliver integrated spoken responses for speaking task six using G+3TiC=C and the five steps.

By doing so, you can demonstrate OPDUL=C in your response.

#1 Make a G+3TiC=C note map.

#2 Listen to the lecture; summarize it (23 minutes).

#3 Read the prompt.

#4 Prepare your response (20 seconds).

#5 Speak (60 seconds).

Test-takers who get high integrated speaking scores have practiced speaking a lot.

Appendix Scoring The TOEFL iBT is divided into four test sections. The first section is reading followed by listening. Because the reading and listening questions are all multiple-choice questions, they are called selective tasks.

If you get a reading or listening question wrong, you will not lose points. Therefore, answer all reading and listening questions.

After a ten-minute break, you will start the speaking section and end with the writing section. The speaking and writing tasks are constructive tasks.

For TOEFL, to construct means to develop and deliver spoken and written arguments.

Calculating Your Speaking Score ETS says that each spoken response is scored by 3 to 6 different certified raters. The response for each task is rated on a scale of 0 to 4.1 For example, on the next page, three raters have scored your independent Speaking Task #1. The average of the three scores is your score for Speaking Task #1.

ETS will do the same for all six speaking tasks. The average of your six speaking scores will be your speaking section score.

ETS will then convert your average speaking score (3.5/4.0) into a final speaking section score out of 30.

3.5/4.0 = 27/30 your speaking section score Calculating Your Writing Score ETS says that both essays will be rated by 2 to 4 certified raters on a score scale of 0 to 5. The average of their scores will be your essay score. 2 For example, the three raters below have scored your independent essay.

12.0 / 3 raters = 4.0/5.0 = your independent essay score Your integrated essay will be rated the same way. ETS will then average your two writing scores for a writing section score out of 30.

8.0 / 2 tasks = 4.0/5.0 = your averaged writing score ETS will then convert your averaged writing score into a writing section score.

4.0/5.0 = 25/30 = your writing section score ETS will then add up the four test section scores for a final score of out 120.

Range Scoring Because your speaking and writing responses will be rated by many raters, it is not always possible to give yourself an accurate, single number score for each spoken and written response when practicing. Instead, give yourself a range score.

Finding Your Range Score Finding your range score is a two-step process. First, check your response for coherence using the applicable Proficiency Guide in the appendix. Next, compare that information to the applicable Rating Guide, then identify the task range. The task range rates (measures) your proficiency level. For example, if your practice independent essay scores in the 4.05.0 range, then your essay has proficiently demonstrated a high level of coherence.

Each task range score is then converted into section rating.

Task Range: 4.05.0 Section Rating: 2430 Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist Proficiency Checklist 1. Does my essay demonstrate organization?

Deduction? Yes__No__  Induction? Yes__No__ 2. Does my essay demonstrate progression?

General-specific? Yes__No__  Specific-general? Yes__No__ 3. Does my essay demonstrate development?

Introduction? Yes__No__  Body? Yes__No__  Conclusion? Yes__No__ 4. Does my essay demonstrate unity?

Topical? Yes__No__  Grammatical? Yes__No__ 5. Does my essay demonstrate proficient language use?

Word choice? Yes__No__  Idioms? Yes__No__  Sentence variety? Yes__No__ 6. Does my essay (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Yes__No__ Notes Independent Essay Rating Guide Task Rating: 4.05.0 Section Rating: 2430 An essay in this range is Coherent because it generally demonstrates proficiency in all of the following areas.

O The essay demonstrates a clear and consistent method of organization.

P The essay demonstrates a clear and consistent progression of ideas.

D The essay demonstrates development of the introduction, body and conclusion; the supporting illustrations are clear and well developed; some areas might lack development and/or an idea might not be completely explained.

U The essay demonstrates topical and grammatical unity; some topical and/or grammatical connections might not be clear or accurate. These errors are minor and do not affect meaning or coherence.

L The essay demonstrates consistent language use; some word choice and/or idiom usage might not be clear or accurate, and/or there might be minor syntax errors. These errors are minor and do not affect meaning or coherence.

Task Rating: 2.53.5 Section Rating: 1723 An essay in this range demonstrates a lack of proficiency in one or more of the following areas.

O The essay demonstrates organization; however, it might not always be clear or consistent.

P The essay demonstrates a progression of ideas; however, it might not always be clear or consistent.

D The essay demonstrates development; however, the introduction, body and/or conclusion might lack development, and/or might not provide enough supporting examples or be sufficiently explained.

U The essay demonstrates topical and grammatical unity; however, there might be topical digressions and/or connections that are not always clear or accurate.

L The essay demonstrates basic but accurate language use with limited sentence variety; inaccurate word choice and/or idiom usage, and/or syntax errors might make the meaning of some sentences unclear.

Task Rating: 1.02.0 Section Rating: 116 An essay in this range demonstrates a serious lack of proficiency in one or more areas: O The essay demonstrates a serious lack of organization.

P The essay demonstrates a serious lack of progression.

D The essay demonstrates a serious lack of development in all areas.

U The essay demonstrates a serious lack of topical and grammatical unity.

L The essay demonstrates a serious lack of language use in all areas.

Notes Integrated Essay Proficiency Checklist Proficiency Checklist 1. Does my essay demonstrate organization?

Block style? Yes__No__  Point-by-point? Yes__No__ 2. Does my essay demonstrate progression?

General-specific Yes__No__  Specific-general? Yes__No__ 3. Does my essay demonstrate development-summarization?

Introduction? Yes__No__  Body? Yes__No__  Conclusion? Yes__No__ 4. Does my essay demonstrate unity-synthesis?

Topical? Yes__No__  Grammatical? Yes__No__ 5. Does my essay demonstrate proficient language use-paraphrasing?

Word choice? Yes__No__  Idioms? Yes__No__  Sentence variety? Yes__No__ 6. Does my essay (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Yes__ No__ Notes Integrated Essay Rating Guide Task Rating: 4.05.0 Section Rating: 2430 An essay in this range is Coherent because it generally demonstrates proficiency in all of the following areas.

O The essay demonstrates a clear and consistent method of organization that accurately shows how the main points in the lecture relate to the main points in the reading.

P The essay demonstrates a clear and consistent progression of ideas.

D The essay demonstrates development-summarization of the introduction, body and conclusion of both the lecture and the reading; the main points are clear and well developed; some points might lack development and/or a lecture point might not be completely explained.

U The essay demonstrates unity-synthesis; some topical and/or grammatical connections between the lecture and the reading might not be clear or accurate. These errors are minor and do not affect meaning or coherence.

L The essay demonstrates consistent and accurate language use-paraphrasing; some word choice and/or idiom usage might not be accurate or clear, and/or there might be minor syntax errors. These errors are minor and do not affect meaning or the connection of the main points.

Task Rating: 2.53.5 Section Rating: 1723 An essay in this range demonstrates a lack of proficiency in one or more of the following areas.

O The essay demonstrates organization; however, the connection between the main points in the lecture and the main points in the reading is not always clear or consistent.

P The essay demonstrates a progression of ideas; however, it might not always be clear or consistent.

D The essay demonstrates development-summarization; however, the main points in the introduction, body and/or conclusion of the lecture and/or the reading might lack development, and/or a main point in the lecture might be missing.

U The essay demonstrates topical and grammatical unity; however, the connection between the main lecture and reading points is not always clear or accurate.

L The essay demonstrates basic language use-paraphrasing with limited sentence variety; frequent and inaccurate word choice and/or idiom usage, and/or errors in syntax make the meaning of some sentences and connections unclear.

Task Rating: 1.02.0 Section Rating: 116 An essay in this range demonstrates a serious lack of proficiency in one or more of the following areas.

O The essay demonstrates a serious lack of organization; the connection between the main points in the lecture and the main points in the reading is not clear or accurate.

P The essay demonstrates a serious lack of progression.

D The essay demonstrates a serious lack of development-summarization in the introduction, body and conclusion of the lecture and the reading; some points have been summarized; however, most lecture points are missing, and/or the summarization of the lecture and/or the reading is not clear or accurate.

U The essay demonstrates a serious lack of topical and grammatical unity; the main points in the lecture and the reading are not topically related and/or the connections between points is not accurate or clear.

L The essay demonstrates a serious lack of language use-paraphrasing; frequent errors in basic word choice and/or syntax make the meaning of sentences unclear.

Notes Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist Proficiency Checklist 1. Does my response demonstrate organization?

Deduction? Yes__No__  Induction? Yes__No__ 2. Does my response demonstrate progression?

General-specific Yes__No__  Specific-general? Yes__No__ 3. Does my response demonstrate development?

Introduction? Yes__No__  Body? Yes__No__  Conclusion? Yes__No__ 4. Does my response demonstrate unity?

Topical Yes__No__  Grammatical? Yes__No__ 5. Does my response demonstrate proficient language use?

Word Choice? Yes__No__  Idioms? Yes__No__  Sentence variety? Yes__No__ Is my delivery proficient?

Fluency? Yes__No__ Automaticity? Yes__No__ Pronunciation? Yes__No__ 6. Does my response (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Yes__No__ Notes Independent Speaking Rating Guide Task Rating: 3.54.0 Section Rating: 2630 A response in this range is Coherent because it generally demonstrates proficiency in all of the following areas.

O The response demonstrates a clear and consistent method of organization.

P The response demonstrates a clear and consistent progression of ideas.

D The response demonstrates development of the introduction, body and conclusion; the supporting illustrations are clear and well developed; minor omissions do not effect meaning or coherence.

U The response demonstrates topical and grammatical unity; the relationship between ideas is clear and accurate both topically and grammatically.

L The response demonstrates clear and accurate language use; minor errors in word choice and/or idiom usage and/or syntax do not affect meaning or coherence.

The delivery demonstrates consistent and accurate fluency, pronunciation and automaticity; minor difficulties in each area do not affect meaning and/or coherence, or require listener effort to understand.

Task Rating: 2.53.0 Section Rating: 1825 A response in this range demonstrates proficiency in at least two of the following areas.

O The response demonstrates organization.

P The response demonstrates a progression of ideas.

D The response demonstrates limited development; the introduction, body and/or conclusion might lack development, particularly in the body.

U The response demonstrates topical and grammatical unity; however, the relationship between ideas might not always be clear or accurate.

L The response demonstrates a limited range of word choice and/or idiom usage, and/or sentence variety; inaccurate word choice and/or idiom usage, and/or syntax errors might make the meaning of some words and sentences unclear.

The delivery demonstrates fluency, pronunciation and automaticity; however, difficulties in each area require listener effort to understand.

Task Rating: 1.52.0 Section Rating: 1017 A response in this range demonstrates a lack of proficiency in at least two of the following areas.

O The response demonstrates a serious lack of organization.

P The response demonstrates a serious lack of progression.

D The response demonstrates limited development; the examples lack details and repeat.

U The response demonstrates a lack of topical and grammatical unity; the connection of ideas is not clear or accurate.

L The response demonstrates a limited range of word choice and/or idiom usage and/or sentence variety; however, inaccurate word choice and/or idiom usage, and/or syntax errors makes the meaning of words and sentences unclear.

The delivery demonstrates difficulties in fluency and/or pronunciation, and/or automaticity; these difficulties make the meaning of words and sentences unclear and require listener effort to understand.

Task Rating: 0.01.0 Section Rating: 09 A response in this range demonstrates a serious lack of proficiency in at least two of the following areas.

O The response demonstrates a serious lack of organization.

P The response demonstrates a serious lack of progression.

D The response demonstrates a serious lack of development in all areas.

U The response demonstrates a serious lack of topical and grammatical unity.

L The response demonstrates a serious lack of language use in all areas.

Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist Proficiency Checklist 1. Does my response demonstrate organization?

Deduction? Yes__No__  Induction? Yes__No__ 2. Does my response demonstrate progression?

General-specific Yes__No__  Specific-general? Yes__No__ 3. Does my response demonstrate development-summarization?

Introduction? Yes__No__  Body? Yes__No__  Conclusion? Yes__No__ 4. Does my response demonstrate unity-synthesis?

Topical Yes__No__  Grammatical? Yes__No__ 5. Does my response demonstrate proficient language use-paraphrasing?

Word choice? Yes__No__  Idioms? Yes__No__  Sentence variety? Yes__No__ Is my delivery proficient?

Fluency? Yes__No__  Automaticity? Yes__No__  Pronunciation? Yes__No__ 6. Does my response (argument) demonstrate coherence?

Yes__No__ Notes Integrated Speaking Rating Guide Task Rating: 3.54.0 Section Rating: 2630 A response in this range is Coherent because it generally demonstrates proficiency in all of the following areas.

O The response demonstrates a clear and consistent method of organization.

P The response demonstrates a clear and consistent progression of ideas.

D The response demonstrates development-summarization of the introduction, body and conclusion; the main idea and supporting illustrations are well developed; minor omissions do not affect meaning or coherence.

U The response demonstrates unity-synthesis; the relationship between ideas is clear and accurate both topically and grammatically.

L The response demonstrates clear and accurate language use-paraphrasing; minor errors in word choice and/or idiom usage, and/or syntax do not affect meaning or coherence.

The delivery demonstrates consistent and accurate fluency, pronunciation and automaticity; minor difficulties in each area do not affect meaning and/or coherence.

Task Rating: 2.53.0 Section Rating: 1825 A response in this range demonstrates proficiency in at least two of the following areas.

O The response demonstrates organization.

P The response demonstrates a progression of ideas; however, it might not always be accurate or clear.

D The response demonstrates development-summarization; however, the introduction, body and/or conclusion might be incomplete due to a lack of details and/or a point not being sufficiently explained.

U The response demonstrates unity-synthesis; however, the relationship between ideas might not always be clear, accurate or consistent due to a lack of topical and/or grammatical unity.

L The response demonstrates limited language use-paraphrasing; word choice and/or idiom usage, and/or syntax might be inaccurate or incomplete making the meaning of words and sentences unclear.

Minor difficulties in fluency and/or pronunciation and/or automaticity require listener effort to understand.

Task Rating: 1.52.0 Section Rating: 1017 A response in this range demonstrates a serious lack of proficiency in at least two of the following areas.

O The response demonstrates a serious lack of organization.

P The response demonstrates a serious lack of progression.

D The response demonstrates limited and incomplete development-summarization.

U The response demonstrates a lack of unity-synthesis; the connection of ideas is not clear, accurate or consistent; the response is often off topic because the test-taker does not understand the requirements of the task.

L The response demonstrates limited language use with little or no paraphrasing; inaccurate word choice and/or syntax errors makes the meaning of words and sentences consistently unclear.

The delivery demonstrates frequent difficulties in fluency and/or pronunciation and/or automaticity; these difficulties make the meaning of words and sentences unclear and require listener effort to understand.

Task Rating: 0.01.0 Section Rating: 09 A response in this range demonstrates a serious lack of proficiency in two or more of the following areas.

O The response demonstrates a serious lack of organization.

P The response demonstrates a serious lack of progression.

D The response demonstrates a serious lack of development-summarization in all areas.

U The response demonstrates a serious lack of unity-synthesis in all areas.

L The response demonstrates a serious lack of language use-paraphrasing in all areas.

Exercises Exercise: Identifying Rhetorical Strategies Task: Identify the rhetorical strategies in each example. Check your answers on page 330.

1. People can be divided according to personality. Those with Type A personalities are driven to succeed and are born leaders while those with Type B personalities are seen followers and less likely to take control. Bill Gates is an example of a Type A personality.

2. The autumn moon glowed blood red in the early evening sky.

3. Eduardo is the perfect husband. He gives his new wife everything.

4. The smoky restaurant made Lucille sick, so she left early and went home to find twenty messages on her answering machine. Two were from her parents and eight were from her boyfriend. The rest were from telemarketers, people trying to sell products and services by phone, products Mary didnt want or need.

5. A TOEFL prep student is a student who is preparing for the TOEFL test.

6. America and Canada are big countries; however, Canada has fewer people.

7. Carol didnt know what to buy, a notebook or a desktop computer.

8. To pass the medical exam, Samira made a study plan. For the next month, she would get up early and study all morning, take an hour for lunch, then nap for an hour. After that, she would study all afternoon.

At five, shed go out for dinner at her favorite Thai restaurant, then return home and study until midnight.

9. Iwona is ecstatic. Her grades are so good she got into Harvard and Yale. Now she must choose which one she will attend.

10. Brooklyn and The Bronx. Where did these two famous American names come from? Many think early English settlers coined these names. Actually, they are Dutch. Many dont know it but Manhattan was originally a Dutch settlement. In 1644, the British took Manhattan from the Dutch by force and renamed it New York after the Duke of York.

Exercise: Identifying Opinions Task: Using the four-question rule, determine if each example is an opinion or not. Check your answers on page 330.

1. Personally, I think that everyone should learn a foreign language.

2. Fernanda really likes dark chocolate.

3. Dr. Inaba believes that the tooth causing so much pain must be extracted.

4. Japanese cars are very popular around the world.

5. How difficult is it to get a perfect score on the TOEFL iBT?

6. The CEO told us that the company had no other choice but to lay off five thousand employees.

7. My geology professor postulates that we will be mining minerals on the moon in twenty years.

8. In this essay, I am going to talk about dogs and cats, and other domestic animals.

9. Iwona is ecstatic. Her grades are so good she got into Harvard and Yale. Now she must choose which one she will attend.

10. Last night, I went to an Italian restaurant and had lasagna.

11. The TOEFL iBT consists of four sections: reading, listening, speaking and writing.

12. There are many English language proficiency tests; however, TOEFL is the test you must take if you are serious about studying at an English-speaking college or university.

13. Drinking a bottle of red wine every day will make you smarter.

14. Why is the price of gasoline going up?

15. Personally, I think that if you want to get a high TOEFL iBT score, you must study hard.

Exercise: Checking for Parallelism Task: Check each sentence for parallelism. Check your answers on page 331.

1. Personally speaking, I believe that we need zoos because they are educating, they are funny and we protect wild animals.

2. In my view, I think that a good parent should be patience and understands.

3. On weekends, I like to go shopping and playing golf.

4. Bob said he went to the store, to the bank and to the car wash.

5. The TOEFL iBT consists of four sections: reads, listening, to speak and the writing.

6. Many scientists use induction when developing theories. First, they observe phenomena, then they formulate conclusions based on their observations. Not Einstein. He did not employ induction when theorizing about the relationship between matter and energy. Instead, he used deduction and figuring out e=mc2 all in his head.

7. The middle of the nineteenth century witnessed two great art movements: Impressionism in France or the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood in England. The Pre-Raphaelites, a group of poets or paintings, believed that the individual artist should have genuine ideas to express, should study Nature attentively, so as to know how to express it, could sympathise with what is direct and serious and heartfelt in previous art.

8. I firmly believe that global warming is caused by car pollution and by factories is polluting.

9. I want a high TOEFL score so I can apply to Yale, Harvard and the Princeton.

10. Singing and to study English is my hobbies.

Exercise: Gerund Predictors Task: Check each example for parallelism. Check your answers on page 332.

1. I think that students should learn a second language as early as possible. Learning a second language will open more doors and it is helpful to get a job.

2. As far as Im concerned, you should exercise for at least one hour every day. Exercising was good for your heart and is good for reducing stress.

3. I prefer to travel by plane instead of train. Flying by plane in America is faster and has been cheaper.

4. Personally speaking, you should not talk on your cell phone while driving. Talking on your cell phone is not only danger for you but also perilous for other drivers as well.

5. It goes without saying that if you want a higher score, you should use a predictor thesis instead of a general thesis. Using a general thesis does not demonstrate advanced organization, progressing, development, unity and language use; however, a predictor thesis does.

6. In the final analysis, to be saving money is better than spending it.

7. From my perspective, I assert that we need zoos. Having zoos means we can protect wild animals, educating parents and children, or provide a fun place to go on weekends.

8. In my experience, Google is the best search engine. Googling information is fastest and easy.

9. The most dangerous shark in the world is not the great white shark but the bull sharks. Thriving in both salty and fresh water, the bull shark has the highest testosterone level of any animal.

10. People are often divided by the so-called personality theory. Being a type A says you are a leader whereas to be a type B is saying you are a follower.

Answer Key Answers: Identifying Rhetorical Strategies 1. classification, illustration, cause-effect, description 2. description, illustration, cause-effect 3. illustration, definition, description 4. illustration, description, definition, cause-effect 5. description, illustration, definition 6. illustration, description, compare-contrast 7. illustration, description, compare-contrast 8. illustration, description, process 9. illustration, description, cause-effect, compare-contrast 10. illustration, description, narration Answers: Identifying Opinions 1. opinion 2. not an opinion 3. opinion 4. not an opinion 5. not an opinion 6. not an opinion 7. opinion 8. not an opinion 9. not an opinion 10. not an opinion 11. not an opinion 12. opinion 13. opinion 14. not an opinion 15. opinion Answers: Checking for Parallelism 1. Personally speaking, I believe that we need zoos because they are educational, they are fun and they protect wild animals.

2. In my view, I think that a good parent should be patient and understanding.

3. a. On weekends, I like to go shopping and to go golfing.

b. On weekends, I like to go shopping and golfing.

4. no errors 5. The TOEFL iBT consists of four sections: reading, listening, speaking and writing.

6. Many scientists use induction when developing theories. First, they observe phenomena, then they formulate conclusions based on their observations. Not Einstein. He did not employ induction when theorizing about the relationship between matter and energy. Instead, he used deduction and figured out e=mc2 all in his head.

7. The middle of the nineteenth century witnessed two great art movements: Impressionism in France and the Pre-Raphaelite Brother in England. The Pre-Raphaelites, a group of poets and painters, believed that the individual artist should have genuine ideas to express, should study Nature attentively, so as to know how to express it, should sympathise with what is direct and serious and heartfelt in previous art.

8. I firmly believe that global warming is caused by car pollution and by factory pollution.

9. a. I want a high TOEFL score so I can apply to Yale, Harvard and to Princeton.

b. I want a high TOEFL score so I can apply to Yale, Harvard and Princeton.

10. Singing and studying English are my hobbies.

Answers: Gerund Predictors 1. a. I think that students should learn a second language as early as possible. Learning a second language will open more doors and will help you get a job.

b. I think that students should learn a second language as early as possible. Learning a second language will open more doors and help you get a job.

2. a. As far as Im concerned, you should exercise for at least one hour every day. Exercising is good for your heart and is good for reducing stress.

b. As far as Im concerned, you should exercise for at least one hour every day. Exercising is good for your heart and for reducing stress.

3. I prefer to travel by plane instead of train. Flying by plane in America is faster and cheaper.

4. Personally speaking, you should not talk on your cell phone while driving. Talking on your cell phone is not only dangerous for you but also perilous for other drivers as well.

5. It goes without saying that if you want a higher score, you should use a predictor thesis instead of a general thesis. Using a general thesis does not demonstrate advanced organization, progression, development, unity or language use; however, a predictor thesis does.

6. In the final analysis, saving money is better than spending it.

7. From my perspective, I assert that we need zoos. Having zoos means we can protect wild animals, educate parents and children, and provide a fun place to go on weekends.

8. In my experience, Google is the best search engine. Googling information is fast and easy.

9. The most dangerous shark in the world is not the great white shark but the bull shark. Thriving in both salt and fresh water, the bull shark has the highest testosterone level of any animal.

10. People are often divided by the so-called personality theory. Basically, being a type A says you are a leader whereas being a type B says you are a follower Independent Essay Rating Note: The check sign () means proficient; the X means lacks proficiency.

Agree-Disagree Prompt Zoo Essay - range score: 4.05.0 TV Essay - range score: 4.05.0 Preference Prompt Laptop v. Desktop Essay - range score: 4.05.0 Compare-Contrast Prompt 1. New Delhi Essay - range score: 4.05.0 2. Eating-Out Essay - range score: 4.05.0 Advantage-Disadvantage Prompt Owning-a-Car Essay - range score: 2.53.0 Advantage Prompt Telecommuting Essay - range score: 4.05.0 Disadvantage Prompt Online Education Essay - range score: 2.53.5 Reason Prompts 1. Technology Essay (internet) - range score: 4.05.0 2. Travel Essay - range score: 253.5 3. Change-the-World Essay - range score: 1.02.0 4. Technology Essay - range score: 4.05.0 Quality Prompt Shelton University Essay - range score: 4.05.0 Advanced Independent Essays Integrated Essay Ratings Argument-Counter Argument Essay 1. Zoo Essay - range score: 4.05.0 Show-Support Essay Animal Behavior Essay - range score: 4.05.0 Speaking Task Ratings Speaking Task One 1. Travel-and-Learning Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 2. Work-and-High-School Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 3. People-Living-Longer Prompt: range score: 3.54.0 1. Technology Prompt (car) - range score: 3.540 Speaking Task Two 1. Exercising Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 2. Airport Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 3. Cook-or-Ready-to-Eat-Meals Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 4. Shopping Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 5. Homeschooling Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 Speaking Task Three 1. Organic-Food-Policy Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 Speaking Task Four 1. Animal Behavior Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 Speaking Task Five 1. Professor-Forgets Prompt -range score: 3.5-4.0 Speaking Task Six 1. Animal Behavior -range score: 3.5-4.0 Notes Audio Scripts Sample Lecture - Big Oil Companies On the contrary, oil companies do more harm than good.

For starters, big oil eliminates jobs to increase profits. Last year, oil companies reduced their work force by 25% while profits were up 50% percent. This trend does not appear to be changing.

Also, oil companies avoid paying taxes by moving overseas. One company, Hamilton, moved to Dubai to reduce its U.S. corporate tax rate. How does this help our roads and bridges?

Worse, petroleum products are the number one cause of global warming.

Every day cars pour billions of tons of CO2 into the atmosphere. CO2 has been directly linked to the greenhouse effect.

The evidence is clear: Oil companies do more harm than good.

Sample Lecture - Downloading Internet Music It happens every second of every day all over the world. One click and that new songthe one you didnt pay foris on your iPod. You may think its legal. After all, downloading music is fast and easy, right? Think again. It goes without saying that downloading music off the web without paying for it is a crime.

I know. I know. Some will argue that Its my democratic right to download music without paying for it. Nonsense. The internet might have started out with the intention of being a democracy but, believe me, those days are long gone. The internet these days is about two things: information and money.

Big money. One of the biggest money makers on the web is music, and music is protected by law. If you download U2s latest album, lets say, and you dont pay for it, then you are breaking the copyright law that says U2 owns that music. It is their property and you just stole it. If you want to listen to U2, youve got to buy it, no ifs, ands or buts.

Also, the artist has a legal right to get paid for his or her work no matter how or where it is downloaded. How would you like it if somebody were stealing your music? This is exactly what Napster was doing. Napster was the first peer-to-peer music sharing web site. Musicians, however, took Napster to court for not paying royalties, money owed each time a song was downloaded via Napster. Napster argued that it was just helping friends share music. The courts disagreed. Napster paid a big fine and is now a pay site.

Moreover, illegally downloading music off the web is not a privacy issue. If you break the law by illegally downloading music, you are a criminal. Im sorry, but you cant have it both ways. You cant break the law and hide behind the privacy issue. The law is clear. Criminals have no right to privacy. Period.

It bears repeating that downloading music without paying for it is a crime no matter what anyone says about the freedom of cyberspace. Just because downloading music is fast and easy doesnt mean you have the right to steal it.

Sample Lecture - Teleconferencing We Americans assume that all business cultures are like ours. Nothing could be further from the truth. Many Middle Eastern and Asian cultures prefer to do business face-to-face. Discussing business over tea or while having dinner is an integral part of the business process in these cultures.

Such traditions help develop mutual respect and trust not only between business partners but between international employees working for the same company. Unfortunately, in the rush for convenience and cost saving, Americans fail to appreciate that not all business cultures view teleconferencing as the ultimate business solution.

The article goes on to say that blue chip companies saved an average of $40 million dollars last year by cutting travel costs. What the article doesnt tell you is that for every dollar saved by cutting travel costs, these same companies paid two dollars to upgrade their intranet systems.

Teleconferencing might be fast and easy but its certainly not cheap, especially when companies need to continually upgrade their computer systems if they want to stay competitive.

Some would argue that teleconferencing is the perfect tool for problem solving, especially when operating under a deadline. Yet how do you know if the information you are receiving is timely and accurate? A good example is the American who called up a colleague in Japan. Because the Japanese colleague was new and did not want to lose face, and because the American was his boss, he told the American exactly what he wanted to hear. The American believed he had the solution to his problem only to realize later that the information was not accurate.

Task #1 - Legalizing Marijuana Once again the issue of legalizing marijuana raises its ugly head. And once again those in favor of legalization are beating the same old drum.

The most common argument you hear for legalizing marijuana is that the government can tax it like alcohol and tobacco. Sounds like a good idea, right? The only problem is the numbers. That $100 billion dollars mentioned in the article? Sounds big. It is, on the state level. On the national level, however, its just a drop in the bucket. Anyone who thinks that we will pay off the national debt by legalizing marijuana is misinformed. It would be better to increase the tax on gasoline, say fifty cents per gallon. That way the government could tax the majority of the population not a minority of drug users.

The article argues that by legalizing marijuana, the crime rate will go down.

Im afraid this just wont happen. Organized crime will wage an all out war to control the growing and manufacturing of marijuana both in America and in their home countries. There is simply too much money for the cartels to suddenly disappear. Worse, these same cartels, once they become legitimate, will ship marijuana into those countries where marijuana is still illegal. This, in turn, will only increase violence in those countries.

The author of the article concludes by saying that its her right to smoke marijuana. Fine. Go right ahead. However, this is where I draw the line: This country is already addicted to too many drugs, from alcohol to tobacco to prescription drugs. Yes, you have the right to poison yourself as you please, but you dont have the right to throw gasoline on a fire that is already burning out of control. That fire is the drug problem in America, and it is only getting worse.

Task #2 - Christopher Columbus Christopher Columbus. For Americans, that name is as famous as Macdonalds and Microsoft. And for good reason. Many Americans believe that Columbus voyage to America in 1492 represents the birth of this nation as we know it. In that light, many would argue that Columbus is the original founding father. History, Im afraid, paints a very different picture.

Contrary to what the article says, Columbus was not fleeing the tyranny of European kings. Far from it. The fact is Columbus was a businessman employed by the King of Spain. What exactly was Columbus job? To find a route to the Indies and bring back gold, silver and spices. What did Columbus get in return? Ten percent of everything he brought back. No.

Columbus wasnt leaving the old in search of the new. His purpose was profit.

As for Columbus being the symbol of progress, nothing could be further from the truth. By 1492, the year in which Columbus sailed the ocean blue, North America had already been discovered. In the eleventh century, Vikings had arrived in eastern Canada long before Columbus ever showed up. If anything, Columbus was late to the party. Whats more, Columbus didnt even set foot on American soil. He made landfall in the present-day Bahamas, then went on to explore present-day Cuba and the Dominican Republic.

This brings us to the last point. Contrary to public perception, Columbus is not a symbol of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness as the article contends. Remember, Columbus was a businessman after his ten percent.

The only problem was he failed to find any gold, silver or spices. Instead, what he found were people. Determined to get his ten percent, Columbus took twenty-five Indians back to Spain with him and sold them into slavery.

This, then, is Columbuss true legacy: the birth of slavery in the new world.

Task #3 - Online Schools Id like to start off by talking about the article I handed out for homework.

The author begins by stating that online universities are not as convenient as advertised, especially if you are on the go all the time. Look, just because its online doesnt mean its easy, all right? Its a university and universities are hard work. Dont blame the school just because you failed to fit the course work into your busy schedule. Thats like saying the new car you bought crashed all by itself while you were driving it.

Also, it goes without saying that if you are going to invest a lot of time and money in your education, then you should at least research those schools you are applying to. Make sure they are certified and have track records.

The fact that the authors friend discovered only later that his online school had a bad reputation tells me more about the friend than it does about the school. Obviously, this individual did not look before he leapt. Once again, it is too easy to blame the school when the problem lies with the individual.

The last point the article makes is the teacher-student ratio. This is perhaps the biggest knock against online schools, the fact that students get less time with professors. But wait. Isnt that the whole point of online learning? To work independently, with instructors there only when you need them? Many online courses operate like this, especially MBA courses. These courses are tailor-made for self-directed, independent-minded students who now exactly what they want, and how to get it.

Task #4 - Organic Food A major trend in the food industry is the increasing popularity of organic food. Yes, organic is more expensive. There is no denying that, just as there is no denying the health risks associated with eating non organic strawberries. Most are unaware that non organic strawberries are one of the most chemically contaminated fruits you can buy. Why? Because farmers apply two chemicals to every crop: a pesticide to protect the fruit from insects and a fungicide to protect the roots from fungus. Both the pesticide and the fungicide contain chemicals that have been linked to breast cancer in woman and to a 50% reduction in sperm count in men. By eating organic strawberries, you can substantially reduce your exposure to these risks.

The author goes on to say that organic food is hard to find. This is simply not true. All you have to do is go to your local grocery store and you will find organic food. Many of the bigger stores, for example, even have organic sections. Not only that but Wal-Mart now offers a wide variety of organic produce. In fact, I buy a lot of organic products at Wal-Mart, such as milk and cottage cheese and, yes, even organic rice.

As for non organic versus organic milk, of course, theres no difference in taste. Why should there be? The whole point of organic milk is not to change the taste but to eliminate pesticides and other man-made chemicals from the milk production process. A big part of that process is the genetically engineered growth hormone rBGH. Farmers give their cows rBGH which, in turn, makes the cows produce far more milk than is naturally possible. Worse, rBGH stays in the milk and enters your body when you drink it. Moreover, research has linked rBGH to colon, breast and prostate cancer.

In the end, buying organic is an investment in your health. Personally, I dont mind paying a little extra. At least I know what Im eating.

Task #5 - Funding Space Exploration Look, how can anyone talk about funding space exploration when here in America 13 million children live in poverty? That number increased more than 11 percent between 2000 and 2005, and its only getting worse. And you want my tax dollars to fund another joy ride to the Moon, or worse, Mars? I dont think so.

But what about all the wonderful inventions that have come from investing in space? Imagine if instead of ski boots, we had a functioning health care system; and instead of edible toothpaste, we had an educational system that actually worked, or a high-speed rail system linking the major cities. But no, what do we have? Joy sticks. Seriously, we dont need to sink any more money into space exploration. What we need is more social responsibility down here on Mother Earth.

And what about space travel? Imagine, honeymooning on the Moon or Mars. Very romantic. And expensive. Case in point: a round trip ticket on a Russian Soyuz spacecraft heading to the International Space Station will cost you a cool $25 million. Will space travel get any cheaper? Not likely.

Space tourism is, and will always be, the playground of the super rich.

Finally, those who support funding a new era in space exploration argue that we must answer the big question: Are we really alone in the cosmos?

My answer to that is: Who cares! We have children going hungry; our bridges and roads are falling apart; our jobs have vanished overseas and our educational system is a disgrace. I say forget the little green men and the honeymoon suite on Mars, and focus on the average guy and gal struggling to make ends meet on Main Street.

Sample Lecture - Animal Behavior Good afternoon. In this lecture, well focus on a common nocturnal animal, the bat. There are two types of bat: micro bats, or true bats, and mega bats, also called fruit bats. Lets start with mega bats.

Size wise, mega bats are from two to sixteen inches in length. Mega bats have extremely sensitive sight and smell. This helps them locate the flowers and fruit upon which they feed. It is while eating that mega bats play an important role in the distribution of plants. Like bees, mega bats serve as pollinators. When they lick nectar or eat flowers, their bodies become covered in pollen which they, in turn, carry to other trees and plants thereby acting as pollinators. In fact, many of the fruits and vegetables on our tables, such as bananas and peaches, would not be there if mega bats did not pollinate plants and trees.

Next are micro bats. As the name implies, micro bats are quite small, about the size of a mouse. To find food, micro bats use echolocation, high frequency sounds they bounce off insects. The most common micro bat is the vesper or evening bat. Like mega bats, micro bats play an important role in the environment. The average vesper bat, for example, can eat one thousand mosquitoes in one night. By doing so, they control the mosquito population.

Task #1 - The American Civil War Of all the generals in the American Civil War, one stands above all the rest: Robert E. Lee. Lee was American nobility. He was born and raised in Virginia. His father was a hero of the Revolutionary War while Lee himself married George Washingtons granddaughter. In 1861, Lee was a colonel in the United States Army when the South left the Union. Lee, claiming he could not draw his sword against his native Virginia, resigned his commission and was soon leading the Army of Northern Virginia.

Like most great military generals, Lee was a gambler. Two battles illustrate this tendency. The first is the battle of Chancellorsville in May, 1863. There, Lee broke all the rules of military engagement. Faced by a Union army twice the size of his own, Lee divided his much smaller army not once, not twice, but three times. In the process, Lee defeated the Union army and established his reputation as a general equal to Napoleon. Time and again, Lee defeated the much larger Union Army.

While Chancellorsville was Lees greatest victory, the battle of Gettysburg, in July, 1863 was Lees greatest defeat. On the third day of battle, Lee, convinced that one final blow would break the Union line, sent the Army of Northern Virginia marching across a mile-wide field. The waiting Union army annihilated Lees men. The South never recovered.

At wars end, many in the North wanted Lee hung for treason. However, Lee never stood trial. Lincoln wanted reconciliation not revenge.

Task #2 - Seamounts Seamounts are of great interest not only to biologists but to the commercial fishing industry as well. And for good reason. The nutrient rich water around a seamount is home to an immense variety offish, many of which have commercial value. One such fish is the orange roughy.

In the mid 1970s, orange roughy was found in great numbers around seamounts near New Zealand. The greatest concentrations were found one kilometer down, a depth once thought impossible to fish. But this did not stop the fishing industry. No longer did depth protect the fish. Helped by new GPS technology, bottom trawling was born. Bottom trawling involves dragging a net across the ocean floor. This is a very destructive form of fishing for not only does the net catch orange roughy, but it also destroys the ocean floor and catches other species that are not commercially valuable. This method of fishing was so effective, and the demand for orange roughy so great, that they were practically wiped out.

Another fish directly impacted by the bottom trawling is the armorhead. In the 1960s, huge numbers of armorheads were discovered around seamounts northwest of Hawaii. In no time at all, Russian and Japanese fishing fleets virtually wiped out the armorhead. Like orange roughy, armorhead stocks have yet to recover.

Sample Dialogue - Organic Food Policy Man: Hi, Wendy.

Woman: Hey, Tom. Have you heard about the new organic food policy?

Man: Yeah. What a great idea. Its about time the school did something to improve the food around here.

Woman: If you ask me, I think the new policy is all wrong.

Man: Why?

Because organic food is way more expensive. In some cases, at least fifty per cent more. Add that to labor costs, you know, Woman: money to pay the cafeteria staff, and Im going to be paying a lot more for my coffee and the milk I put in it. I hate to think what a salad will cost. Organic may be cheaper in the future, but right now its for people with money not poor students like me.

But think of all the health benefits. Youll be eating food that Man: doesnt have any chemicals or antibiotics in it. Not only that but all that good organic food will be lower in fat and calories. I mean, thats got to be good, right?

Dont be fooled. A hamburger is a hamburger whether the meat is Woman: organic or not. Both will have the same amount of fat and calories. The only difference is the organic hamburger has no pesticides or antibiotics in it.

Well, I still think its a good idea. By offering organic food, well Man: be eating a lot better. Even the snacks in the vending machines will be organic. Its definitely the wave of the future. Best of all, well be helping local farmers.

Woman: What I dont like is the university telling us what we can and cant eat. Not everybody wants to eat organic, you know. If I want to eat non organic, thats my choice. Sorry, but the school should not be in the health care business.

Task #1 - New Professor Man: Hi, Carrie.

Woman: Hi, Joe. Have you heard about Professor Wright, the new English professor?

I have. Ive also heard that her salary is off the charts. I just think Man: its wrong that a professor should make so much money. Shes a teacher not a rock star. And whos going to pay for her salary? We are. You watch. This time next year our tuition will go up.

I think Professor Wright deserves her salary. I mean, cmon, shes Woman: won every literary prize under the sun. And shes not just a writer either. Shes also a champion for womens rights. The woman has done it all. Who wouldnt want to take her class?

What I dont understand is why the school is paying so much for an English professor, especially when the English department is Man: so small. At her salary, the school couldve renovated the library, and still had money left over. If you ask me, the school made a poor investment in hiring Professor Wright.

Woman: The school hired Professor Wright because she brings star quality to our school. Her name will really put this school on the map.

My girlfriend goes to Morgan College. She had a really famous math professor. The guy showed up for the first class. After that, Man: grad students did all the teaching while the professor was off lecturing. Thats what star professors do. They spend more time promoting themselves than actually teaching. I suspect Professor Wright will do the same.

Well, I think its a great move on the schools part. Education Woman: these days is all about marketing and brand names. And Professor Wright is definitely a brand name.

Man: I just hope youre right about Professor Wright.

Task #2 - Managers Job Man: Hey, Bonnie, lets check out the job board. Look, they need someone to manage the exercising facility.

Woman: Yeah, I saw that.

You should grab it. Youre majoring in health sciences and youre Man: in your graduating year. And I know your GPA is way above 3.0.

Youre exactly what theyre looking for. Go for it.

I dont have time. Besides, Im not aiming for a career in sports management. Im aiming for med school. I want to be a doctor.

Woman: Thats been my dream all along. Managing the exercising facility would be a great job, but at this point in my life, it would take me in the wrong direction.

Dont look at it as a career. Look at it as something to put on your Man: resume. Employers want to know if youve had management experience. And that is what this position offers. Its not often a job like this comes around.

Woman: I dont have the time. Im studying for the MCAT.

Man: The medical school entrance test?

Yeah. Ive been preparing for it for the last two months, 24/7, and Im still not ready. If I took this job, it would be nothing but a Woman: distraction. Id be worrying about scheduling yoga classes when I should be at home studying organic chemistry. No. My priority right now is getting a high MCAT score so I can go to med school. Why dont you apply for the job?

Man: Me? Are you kidding? Im a total couch potato.

Task #3 - Student-of-the-Year Award Woman: So, Brad, who do you think will win the Student-of-the-Year Award?

Man: Mary Jones, of course. Shes got my vote.

Woman: Mary Jones? Youve got to be joking? Whats she ever done?

Well, for starters, shes the top of her class. Not only that, but Man: shes organized food kitchens all over town to feed the homeless.

Im telling you, Mary Jones is the complete student. Shes got my vote.

Yeah, well, Im voting vote for Carl Reed. Hes the quarterback.

Woman: He led our school team to a perfect record. The first time in school history. Hes also on the soccer team and the wrestling team. Hes an all-round athlete. The total package.

Youre forgetting that the winner of the award should best represent the school motto of Diligence and Desire. Mary Jones Man: is already working on her second book of poetry. And her soup kitchens are expanding all across the state. On top of that, she just got accepted into Yale. If thats not diligence and desire, I dont know what is.

Diligence and desire is beating the best teams in the state. Thats Woman: what Carl Reed did. And hes only in second year. You watch, hes going to be a superstar one day.

Football is a team sport. How can you say that one man is Man: responsible for winning all those games? That logic is beyond me.

But with Mary Jones it is clear. Her selfless efforts to help the poor and save the planet are an inspiration to us all.

Woman: You want to make a little bet as to who will win?

Man: Bet? What for? Mary Jones is going to win hands down.

Woman: Yeah, well, dont count your chickens before theyre hatched.

Task #4 - No Laptops Woman: Youve got to be kidding. No laptops in class? Where did you hear this?

I read it on the school website. Starting Monday, you cant use a laptop in class. If you do, youll be asked to leave or turn it off.

Man: Actually, I think its a good idea. In my psychology class, everybodys taking notes on their laptops. Thats forty people all typing away. You cant believe the noise.

But my laptop is my life. I always take notes with it. And now they expect me to use a pen? Forget it. Writing by hand is too Woman: slow. Not only that but Ill have rewrite my notes when I get home. Talk about a waste of time. This new policy is definitely going to make a lot of people angry.

I dont think so. The school is just trying to improve classroom Man: conditions. Imagine trying to teach when everybody is looking at their computers and not at you. Laptops are definitely coming between the teacher and the students.

What angers me is the school said I had to buy a laptop. It was a requirement. So I bought one even though I couldnt afford it.

Woman: And now the school is telling me not to use the laptop they told me I had to buy? Ridiculous. If I cant use my laptop in class, then the school should refund the cost of buying it. Its only fair.

Task #5 - New Dormitory Policy Woman: Hey, Toni, check out the poster for the new dorms. Nice. Internet ready. Laundry in the basement. And a fridge in each!

I prefer the old dorms. They give the school character. These new dorms look like ugly apartment buildings. Not only that but they Man: have nothing to do with the schools philosophy of maintaining traditional educational values in a traditional New England setting.

Schools have to evolve to meet the needs of each new generation.

Woman: Our generation is used to certain conveniences, the internet being one. Personally, I cant wait to use the exercising room. The card locks are a nice touch too.

Electronic card locks? Give me a break. What I dont like is the fact that the room assignments are first-come, first-served. I think second year seconds should have priority over first years when it Man: comes to choosing rooms. Ive already invested plenty in this school. As a returning second year student, I should at least have some rights. But with this system, I will be competing with first years. I just dont think its fair.

First-come, first-served makes everybody equal. Also, its a good Woman: way of determining whether or not you are serious about studying here.

Man: Yeah, well, Ive decided not to come back.

Woman: What? Why not?

Man: Im engaged.

Woman: Really? Congratulations.

Man: Thanks. But it means that as a second year, Im no longer eligible for a dorm room. See what it says here? Dorms are divided by gender. That means my fiance and I cant live together. Since there are no dorms for married couples, Ive decided to drop out.

Task #6 - Volunteering Woman: I cant believe it. Who dreamed up this policy?

Man: What policy? Whatre talking about?

Theres a new policy posted on the board here. It says before I can graduate I have to complete 48 hours of volunteer work. Over Woman: three months, thats four hours a week. Where am I going to find four hours a week? I have a part-time job. I cant quit. I need the money. Sorry, but I cant afford to spend time volunteering.

But think of all the experience you will gain. Volunteering looks Man: good on a resume, you know. Employers want to know if youre involved with the community. My fathers a lawyer. He does free legal work all the time.

Yeah, well, your father doesnt have to write a graduate thesis.

Volunteering will rob me of time Im going to need for Woman: researching and writing next semester. This new policy puts way too much pressure on graduating students. Graduating students should be focused on researching and writing. This is not adding to our educational experience. Its simply a distraction.

Cmon, four hours a week is not going to kill you. I mean, really, Man: you could do an hour a night for four nights, or all four hours on Saturday morning. Four hours wont be that hour to fit into your schedule.

What I dont like is this is the first time Ive heard about this policy. If the university is suddenly going to change the Woman: graduation requirements, they should at least give us six months warning. If I had known, I mightve switched schools. Now I have no choice. If I dont volunteer, I dont graduate.

Task #1 - Sharks No other animal instills as much fear in man as does the shark. And no other shark is more widely feared than the great white. However, despite Hollywoods best efforts, experts do not consider the great white to be the most dangerous shark in the world. That label goes to the bull shark.

The bull shark, also known as the whaler shark, gets its name from its stocky body, flat nose, and aggressive behavior. Bull sharks can reach a length of six-and-a-half feet and are commonly found patrolling shorelines near populated areas. They will eat anything that comes their way, including garbage and other sharks. What makes the bull shark so aggressive is that their bodies contain more testosterone than any other animal on the planet, even more than lions and tigers. This makes them arguably the most aggressive predator on the planet. But it doesnt stop there.

Bull sharks thrive in any kind of water, including fresh water. Scientists have found bull sharks thousands of miles up the Amazon and as far up the Mississippi River as Illinois. In Nicaragua, bull sharks have even been seen jumping rapids like salmon to get upstream. In Australia, a bull shark travelled eighty miles up an inland waterway system and killed a swimmer.

Bull sharks are apex predators with most human deaths attributed to them.

So what are your chances are being attacked by a bull shark? Not very good, Im afraid. In fact, more people die every year from falling coconuts than from shark attacks. Remember that the next time youre on vacation, sitting under a coconut tree and worrying about whether to go into that beautiful clear blue water or not.

Task #2 - The Western One movie strongly influenced by the western is Star Wars. When it was first released in May, 1977, Star Wars was a huge international hit. With its big screen effects, Star Wars gave us space as wed never seen it before.

However, despite Star Wars futuristic look, it still has one foot planted firmly in the past, namely the Hollywood western.

Perhaps the most obvious way Star Wars borrows from the western is the distinction between good and evil. In early westerns, the bad guys always wore black hats while the good guys always wore white hats. In Star Wars, director George Lucas puts these tried-and-true symbols to work. The bad guys, led by Darth Vader, are all in black while Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia, both rebels in their own right, are dressed in white.

The storyline too borrows heavily from the western. A popular western theme is the kidnapping of a beautiful white maiden by savage Indians. This is exactly what happens in Star Wars. Princess Leia is captured not by Indians, but by Darth Vader, a metaphorical Indian chief whose village, the Death Star, is a seemingly impenetrable fortress in which Princess Leia is being held.

The rescue of Princess Leia is another way that Star Wars borrows heavily from the western. In Hollywood westerns, the kidnapped maiden is always rescued in the end with the Indians all dead and the good guys returning to the safety of their own land. This is exactly what happens in Star Wars.

With Luke Skywalker leading the rebel force, he frees Princess Leia and together she and Luke are honored as heroes in their homeland. In the end, Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia are unerring symbols of good conquering evil, a civilizing force in an otherwise savage new frontier called space.

Task #3 - Charles Darwin Everyone knows Charles Darwin as the man who wrote On the Origin of Species. On the Origin of Species sold well in Darwins lifetime, however it did not sell as well as another popular Darwin book. That book, published in 1881, is titled The Formation of Vegetable Mould Through the Action of Worms, With Observations on Their Habits. With the publication of this book, Darwin revolutionized soil and agricultural science. Lets take a brief look at how he did it.

As a boy growing up in rural England, Darwin was fascinated by earthworms. While most people saw earthworms as an ugly, useless nuisance, Darwin realized their value through a series of experiments.

However, his research was overtaken by the writing of On the Origin of Species. Later in life, Darwin returned to his study of earthworms and proved that earthworms were not useless pests but in fact played a crucial role in maintaining healthy soil. Darwin observed that earthworms were busy at work turning over the soil by eating it and excreting it. The turning of soil allowed water to penetrate more deeply and allowed more oxygen to enter the ground while the fertilizing added nutrients.

Darwin proved the earthworms value by doing a simple experiment. In a field near his house, Darwin scattered small pieces of coal. In time, the earthworms had moved so much soil that the pieces of coal had settled deep in the soil proving that the worms were indeed at work turning the soil.

With this discovery, Darwin proved that the common earthworm was not a pest but an essential part of the agricultural process.

Task #4 - White Collar Crime On December 11, 2008, the business world was rocked by news no one could believe. Even now, people are still shaking their heads. On that December day, Bernard L. Madoff was arrested for securities fraud. Madoff freely confessed that his private investment fund was in fact a Ponzi scheme, a criminal enterprise in which Madoff took money from one party and, instead of investing it as promised, gave it to another party while taking a cut in the process. Ponzi schemes are nothing new. However, the size of Madoffs Ponzi scheme made it the biggest financial fraud in history. All told, Madoff stole close to $50 billion dollars from investors worldwide. In the process, Madoff destroyed thousands of lives including those of Hollywood movie stars and European nobility.

How did Madoff get away with it and for so long? The answer is simple.

Madoff was one of the most respected men on Wall Street. Hed served as chairman of the Board of Directors of the NASD (the National Association of Securities Dealers) and was one of the first to champion electronic trading. He was active in high society as well, serving on the boards of prestigious universities and charities. In short, Bernie Madoff commanded so much business and social respect that no one ever suspected that he was running a criminal enterprise. And why would people suspect him? After all, his private investment fund was making people rich, even in bad times.

Yet when the stock market crashed in the fall of 2008, Madoffs house of cards crashed with it. With stock prices falling, Madoff investors suddenly wanted their money back. The only problem was Madoff could not return their investments. The money had simply vanished.

Task #5 - Space Junk The passage you just read tells only one side of the space race story. What it doesnt mention is that in mans race to conquer space, man created a huge problem with no apparent solution. That problem is space junk.

At last count, there were over ten thousand man-made objects in low earth orbit including cameras, tools, toothbrushes and bags of garbage. What worries scientists most is the larger pieces of space junk, such as satellites.

When big pieces of space junk collide, they literally explode. This, in turn, creates thousands of smaller pieces of junk, all of which are orbiting the earth at more than 17,000 miles an hour. Combined, these smaller pieces of space junk create a corrosive effect when they hit other objects, much like sandblasting the side of a building. This rain of space junk can seriously damage not only operating satellites but it is also a threat to all space flights, manned or otherwise. It has been estimated that the Space Shuttles chance of hitting a piece of space junk, and suffering a catastrophic impact, is 1-in-185. To prevent space junk from penetrating it, the International Space station has been fitted with armored walls.

The ever-increasing problem of space junk has become known as the Kessler Syndrome. Donald Kessler, a NASA scientist, describes a scenario in which there is so much space junk colliding and dividing that one day it will be too dangerous for man to travel into space. In other words, the garbage orbiting the earth will destroy anyone and anything that tries to enter it.

Sample Dialogue - Harvard Law Man: Hi, Betty. Whats wrong?

Woman: Well, theres good news and bad.

Man: Okay, so whats the good news?

Woman: I got accepted into Harvard Law.

Man: Congratulations! Thats fantastic.

Woman: Thanks. Now for the bad news: Harvard is not cheap. I nearly died when I saw the tuition.

Man: Yeah, but its Harvard. Ivy League.

I know. I want to go, but I cant afford it. I already have four years Woman: worth of undergrad loans at this school. If I do three years of Harvard Law, Ill be even more in debt. Im not sure what to do.

Man: What about applying for a scholarship? How are your grades?

Woman: Im at the top of my class.

There you go. Youd have a really good chance of getting a Man: scholarship. Some scholarships pay all your tuition. If you dont get a full scholarship, you should at least get something for books.

I got a scholarship here, and boy did I save a bundle.

Woman: Applying for a scholarship is definitely an option. Ill have to check it out.

You could also take time off and work for a year or two, you know, postpone admittance. That way you could save money for Man: tuition. You might not be able to pay off the full cost, but you could at least pay off some of it. That way youd owe less in the long run.

Woman: Yeah. Obviously, I have a decision to make.

Sample Dialogue - Professor Forgets Student: Professor Morrison?

Professor: Hi, Sue. Come in. Whats up?

Student: I just wanted to remind you of the meeting tonight in Anderson Hall.

Professor: Meeting? What meeting?

Student: The Environmental Club meeting. You said youd come and give a talk about winning the National Science Prize.

Professor: Tonight? Oh, no. I promised the Biology Club Id speak to them tonight in Farnell Hall.

I see. But were expecting a big crowd. Weve been advertising Student: it all month. We even sold tickets to raise money. I guess Ill just have to refund them.

Look, maybe we can work something out. You know, I could Professor: always record my talk to the Biology Club, then email you the file. That way you could present my talk to your group at your convenience.

Student: Yeah. That would work.

Also, Im part of a lecture tomorrow night over at Gethin-Jones Hall. The topic is ethics and nano engineering. You have to buy Professor: tickets. But since Im speaking, Im sure I can get you and your group in free. Id be willing to stay after and answer questions about the prize. What do you think?

Student: Thats a possibility too. Let me talk to my group first and see what they say.

Task #1 - Borrowing Notes Man: Hey, Julie. You look upset. Whats wrong?

Woman: Hi, Ryan. Oh, its nothing, really.

Man: Cmon, spill it.

Well, theres this guy in my organic chemistry class. He always Woman: wants to borrow my notes. Its really beginning to bug me. I keep telling him I need my notes to study, but he just wont leave me alone.

Man: If I were you, Id tell your professor. Who is it?

Woman: Lynda Gordon.

I had her last semester. Shes great. Id go see her right now. She needs to know that youre having a hard time studying because Man: some guys distracting you. Shell understand. She doesnt fool around either. Once you tell her whats happening, shell set the guy straight.

Woman: I was thinking about talking to Professor Gordon, but Man: But what?

Woman: I dont want to get a bad name, you know, the student whos always running to the professor when somethings wrong.

You wont get a bad name. This is university not high school.

Man: Look. Heres another idea. Tell the guy he can borrow your notes, but on one condition.

Woman: What?

Man: That he pay you.

Woman: Pay me? For my notes?

Man: Why not? Organic chemistry is no easy course. Besides, if youre going to do all that work for this guy, then you should at least get paid, right? Id ask for at least a hundred bucks.

Task #2 - Rent Increase Man: Fifty percent! Can you believe it? I thought living off campus would be more affordable. Boy, was I wrong.

Woman: Didnt your landlord warn you that your rent was going up?

No. He just showed up the day before the rent was due and said, Man: By the way, your rent just went up fifty percent. Talk about a shock.

Woman: So whatre you going to do?

Man: I have no idea.

You know, increasing the rent like that without proper notice cant Woman: be legal. If I were you, Id talk to a lawyer, get some legal advice.

Serious. There are laws that protect tenants from unscrupulous landlords.

Man: Arent lawyers really expensive?

Woman: Not if you go over to the law department. I bet you can find a third year whod help you pro bono.

Man: Pro bono? Whats that?

It means no cost. Law students often give legal advice for free.

Woman: Its a great way for them to practice law and learn how to deal with clients.

Man: Great idea. But in the meantime, I still have to pay my rent. I mean, I do like the place.

Woman: You have a two-bedroom, right?

Man: Right.

Woman: So why not get a roommate? That way you could share the costs and you wouldnt have to move.

Man: I thought about that, but I like living on my own. Besides, Im not sure how well I would get along with a roommate.

Task #3 - Giving a Presentation Woman: Hi, Greg. Do you have a minute?

Man: Sure, Anne. Whats up?

Professor Rogers just asked me to do a presentation. Lately, Ive Woman: been helping people find jobs. Its this volunteer work Ive been doing after school. Anyway, Professor Rogers wants me to give a presentation about it. Stupid me, I said yes.

Man: Why? Whats wrong with giving a presentation?

Woman: Im terrified. I absolutely hate talking in front of a class.

Man: When do you have to present?

Woman: In two weeks.

Well, you could always tell Professor Rogers youre not comfortable doing it. Im sure hed understand. The only problem Man: is you made a promise and if you break it, it might not look too good later on, especially if you need Professor Rogers recommendation or something.

Woman: Yeah, I know. The more I think about doing it, the more scared I get. Look at me! Im shaking.

If youre not comfortable speaking in a classroom, why not change the location, you know, to a conference room? Theyre Man: definitely less formal than a classroom. You could even have food and drinks. Its a great way to relax everybody. Ive done it.

Believe me, it works.

Task #4 - Research Assistant Woman: Hey, Tom. Congratulations. I hear you got a job doing research for Professor Wilson.

Wow. Word really travels fast. But you know what? Professor Man: Smith just asked me if I wanted to go to Arizona to do archeological work on a Hopi Indian village. And get this: Its all expenses paid for the entire month of July. Can you believe it?

Woman: So go.

Man: I want to. But the problem is Ive already promised Professor Wilson Id be his research assistant this summer.

Woman: Whats he want you to research?

Man: Early American pottery. Not exactly Arizona, is it?

Look, why dont you explain the situation to Professor Wilson.

Woman: Im sure hell understand. Hes a pretty cool guy. Besides, he can easily get another research assistant.

Man: Yeah, but hes famous. His name on my resume almost guarantees me a teaching position after graduation.

Okay. Well, how about this. While youre in Arizona, do research Woman: for Professor Wilson online. Spend a few hours every day googling early American pottery, then email him the results.

Man: Yeah. I never thought about that. Thats definitely doable. Hey, do you want to work for Professor Wilson?

Woman: And be stuck in a library all summer? Ill let you know, okay?

Task #5 - Plagiarism Man: Are you sure?

Woman: Yes. My professor plagiarized my essay, not just a few words, but an entire page verbatim in his last research paper.

Man: This happened once before. A student accused her professor of plagiarism.

Woman: And?

Man: The professor was fired.

Great. Maybe I should just forget the whole thing. Maybe I should Woman: be flattered that a professor borrowed my work, and just shut up about it.

Marilynn, the man did not borrow your work. He stole it. If youd done this, stolen his work, you wouldve been kicked out of Man: school in two seconds. No. Theres no way you can back down.

Youve got to confront the man. You need to take your essay and his paper to his office, and tell him in no uncertain terms that what he did was wrong.

Woman: But hes one of the most popular professors.

Man: Hes a thief.

Woman: He gave me an A+  for the essay he plagiarized!

Look, if you dont want to confront him, then youve got to go to Man: the Dean. This is a serious breech of academic ethics. The sooner you confront the man, the better. Who knows how many other student essays hes plagiarized?

Woman: But if I go to the Dean, itll be all over the school in no time.

Man: Yeah, well, I know what Id do.

Sample Lecture - Animal Behavior Animal behavior can be classified according to the time of day an animal is active. Animals, such as horses, elephants and most birds, are said to be diurnal because they are active during the day and rest at night. Those animals active at dawn and dusk are said to be crepuscular. Beetles, skunks and rabbits fall into this category. The third group are those animals that sleep during the day and are active at night. They are called nocturnal. A good example is the bat. Bats have highly developed eyesight, hearing and smell. This helps them avoid predators and locate food. Being nocturnal also helps them avoid high temperatures during the day, especially in deserts where temperatures can reach well over one hundred degrees Fahrenheit. There are two types of bat: micro bats, or true bats, and mega bats, also called fruit bats. Lets start with mega bats.

Size wise, mega bats range from two to sixteen inches in length. Mega bats have extremely sensitive sight and smell. This helps them locate the flowers and fruit upon which they feed. It is while eating that mega bats play an important role in the distribution of plants. Like bees, mega bats serve as pollinators. When they lick nectar or eat flowers, their bodies become covered in pollen which they, in turn, carry to other trees and plants thereby acting as pollinators. In fact, many of the fruits and vegetables on our tables, such as bananas and peaches, would not be there if mega bats did not pollinate plants and trees.

Next are micro bats. As the name implies, micro bats are quite small, about the size of a mouse. To find food, micro bats use echolocation, high frequency sounds they bounce off insects. The most common micro bat is the vesper or evening bat. Like mega bats, micro bats play an important role in the environment. The average vesper bat, for example, can eat one thousand mosquitoes in one night. By doing so, they control the mosquito population.

Task #1 - Defamation There are two types of defamation. The first is slander. Slander is a false statement which is spoken to another person other than the subject. A spoken statement may be made in person or through media, such as television or radio. A statement is slanderous if it is heard and if, as a result of hearing it, the listener has a negative impression of the subject. The second type of defamation is libel. Libel is a false statement which is written about someone in a book, a newspaper, or some other written media.

It is libelous if it casts a negative light on the subject and is false. In this case, the plaintiff must prove that the statement is false in order to win a claim of defamation. In addition, the statement must be a fact not simply the writers opinion. Lets take a look an example of libel.

Lets say youre a journalist, and you dont like Suzie the movie star. In an article, you claim that Suzie paid a bribe to adopt an African baby. You know it isnt true, but you wrote it just to make Suzie look bad. Your article was read by millions, and by Suzie. As a result, Suzie sues you and your publisher for defamation of character. You, the defendant, argue that the information in your article is true and not just your opinion. Suzie, however claims that the information is false, and that it has damaged her reputation.

How? Suzie was supposed to get a big commercial endorsement from the Baby Perfume Company, but Baby Perfume broke the contract when it read your article. At this point, Suzie must prove that the information in your article is false. If she proves that you did indeed lie, then she wins her case, and you suffer the consequences. However, if Suzie fails to prove that you lied, she loses the case.

Task #2 - Earthquakes Earthquakes occur because the earths surface, instead of being one big piece, is actually divided into parts called tectonic plates. Where two plates meet is called a fault line. When two of these plates move or collide along a fault line, a shock wave occurs. These shock waves are called seismic waves. They are so powerful they can change the surface of the earth, as well as destroy buildings, cause avalanches and create giant sea waves called tsunamis.

Earthquakes are measured by a seismograph. Seismographs measure the duration and the intensity of an earthquake. An earthquakes intensity is measured on a scale called the Richter Scale. An earthquake that measures 4 on the Richter Scale is considered a minor earthquake whereas an 8 is considered great and with catastrophic potential.

There are two basic types of earthquake. The first type is the strike-slip. A strike-slip earthquake occurs when one tectonic plate shifts horizontally against a second, stationary plate. An example of a strike-slip earthquake was the great San Francisco earthquake of 1908. It occurred before seismography was developed. However, geologists estimate it registered 7.9 on the Richter Scale with the shock waves felt as far away as Los Angeles.

Over 3,000 people died, most in the fires that burned out of control.

Next is the dip-slip earthquake. A dip-slip earthquake occurs when one tectonic plate shifts vertically along a fault line. A recent example of a dip-slip earthquake was the Indian Ocean earthquake in December, 2004. It lasted almost ten minutes and registered 9.3 on the Richter Scale, making it the second largest earthquake ever recorded. The fault line was 1,200 miles long under the Indian Ocean. Of that length, an estimated 994 miles rose more than fifty feet. So great was the shock that the entire earth shock for almost half a second. Tragically, over 230,000 people died.

Task #3 - Estrogen In women, estrogen regulates the development of female sexual characteristics and reproduction. As a woman reaches middle age, around age 45, the estrogen level decreases. Indications of decreased estrogen are hot flashes, mood swings, and weak or broken bones due to a loss of bone mass. It wasnt until the early 1960s that author Robert Wilson in his book Feminine Forever recommended that women could stop the aging process by taking estrogen pills. Suddenly, women started taking estrogen and were feeling much better for it. However, in the early 1970s, a rise in uterine cancer was connected to an increase in estrogen usage, so women stopped taking estrogen almost overnight. In the late 1970s, doctors did an about face and said that it was okay to take estrogen combined with another hormone, progestin. By the 1990s, doctors were so enthusiastic about the estrogen-progestin combination that they were telling women that hormone replacement therapy (HRT for short) was the solution to stopping heart attacks. In short, HRT was a life saver. By 2000, almost six million women in the United States were taking some form of HRT. That, then, is a brief history of estrogen use in America. But is the news all good? No.

A lot of research has been done on estrogen, the most striking of which was a report by the Womens Health Initiative. In July, 2002, the Womens Health Initiative announced the preliminary results of their HRT research.

Of the 16,000 women they were studying, HRT had increased the risk of heart attack by 29%, breast cancer by 24%, blood clots by 100% and stroke by 41%. The evidence was clear: hormone-replacement therapy was life-threatening. Because of these results, the Womens Health Initiative stopped their research. Numerous other studies have since supported the findings of the Womens Health Initiative.

Task #4 - Invasive Species Two factors determine whether a plant or an animal is invasive. The first is the species-based mechanism. All species, whether invasive or not, compete to survive. However, invasive species demonstrate specific traits that help them outcompete natives species. Those traits are the ability to reproduce faster, rapid growth, a high dispersal rate, and an ability to withstand environmental conditions.

Next is the ecosystem-based mechanism. Within every ecosystem, certain plants and animals fill specific niches. This creates a balance. However, when that balance is disrupted, such as a decrease in soil quality, invasive species take advantage of this imbalance and start to appear. Some invasive species simply move into a new ecosystem because there is simply space to grow and thrive. An example is the feral hog, or wild pig, in the southern United States.

In 1539, pigs first arrived in America with the Spanish explorer Hernando de Soto. Since then, Americans have kept pigs, many of which escaped and roamed freely. The problem suddenly became serious at the beginning of the twentieth century when pig hunters introduced European wild boars.

Some European boars escaped and bred with wild American pigs. The result was the feral hog, an invasive species whose numbers are growing at an alarming rate. Feral hogs readily adapt to any new environment. They fear nothing, not even humans. Because they dig for food, they destroy native habitat and farmers crops. Worse, feral hogs are prodigious breeders.

A population can double in size in four months. The problem is most acute in Texas with over 2,000,000 feral hogs. Feral hogs have recently been sighted in Wisconsin and Canada. To date, the largest feral hog ever recorded was Hogzilla shot in Georgia in 2004. Hogzilla was over seven feet long and weighed over 800 pounds.

Task #5 - Taxation in America Income tax is a tax on income earned by an individual or a business, such as a company, a partnership, or an organization. This tax is imposed on the net income of the taxpayer. Net income is the result of all earned income reduced by deductions, which are the costs associated with earning the income. A tax on a transaction is called a sales tax. Paid by the purchaser, this tax is a percentage of the price of the item purchased. Sales tax can also be a tax on a service, such as having your hair cut or buying a new car. The government can also impose a tax on property. The property may be real property, such as a house or land, or personal property, such as a car or a boat.

Now, if youre like most Americans, you hate paying taxes, especially income tax. Why do Americans hate paying income tax? For a variety of reasons. First, many Americans dont pay income tax because the income tax form is simply too complicated. Many fail to understand what all those lines and instructions mean. As a result, they become frustrated and refuse to pay.

Next, many believe that income tax unfairly targets the middle class. A good example is Warren Buffett. Buffet, one of the richest men in the world, pays an average of 17% income tax thanks his army of lawyers and accountants while his secretary pays 30%.

Finally, Americans hate paying income tax because they think it is a tax on success. Why, many Americans wonder, if I am successful, should I have to hand over all my hard-won cash to Uncle Sam, and get little or nothing in return? Actually, you do get something in return. You get roads, law enforcement and social services, all of which are paid by tax dollars.

Glossary academic formal level of education at an institution of higher learning, such as a community college or university.

ambiguous not clear; having more than one meaning argument a. the process of arguing with the purpose of persuading or informing an audience; b. a summary of the main points in a literary work automaticity done automatically CBT acronym for computer-based TOEFL test claim to take a position; to express an opinion coherence demonstrating an orderly, logical and aesthetically consistent relation of parts; writing and speaking in a clear and consistent manner context situation; position in time; the background story deduction a form of logic in which a series of premises leads to a conclusion distractor for TOEFL, information purposefully inserted into a question, essay or dialogue that sounds important but is not; information that distracts you from the right answer essay a written argument ETS acronym for Educational Testing Services, the designer and implementer of TOEFL world wide; located in Princeton, New Jersey, USA; www.ets.org evidence facts to support an opinion, claim or conclusion fluency speaking smoothly and easily; naturally iBT acronym for internet-based TOEFL test incoherent lacking coherence; not clear, not intelligible induction a form of logic in which a conclusion is inferred from examples or evidence lecture a verbal argument or summary of facts main topic the main subject or main idea in an argument off topic not focused on the main topic on topic focused on the main subject obscured hidden; not clear or easily understood opinion a belief, conclusion or claim; also a thesis G+TiC a paragraph argument map that uses deduction as a method of organization: G (general statement = opinion or premise) + Transition + illustration + Concluding sentence G+TiC=C a three-part argument map that uses deduction as a method of organization: G (general statement = opinion or premise) + TiC (body paragraph) = C (conclusion) G+2TiC=C a four-part argument map that uses deduction as a method of organization: G (general statement = opinion or premise) + 2TiC (two body paragraphs) = C (conclusion) G+3TiC=C a five-part argument map that uses deduction as a method of organization: G (general statement = opinion or premise) + 3TiC (three body paragraphs) = C (conclusion) pace the speed at which one speaks; a slow pace, a fast pace PBT acronym for paper-based TOEFL test; the original TOEFL test premise something considered to be true or factual; used as a starting point for reasoning or for taking action proficient demonstrating skill and knowledge prompt something that moves you to take action; for TOEFL, a question to be answered either verbally or in writing pronunciation the act of producing sounds based on an accepted standard of correctness range a set area; the distance between two points or numbers rater for TOEFL, a person trained by ETS to rate (measure) test-taker speaking and writing proficiency according to a set of standardized rubrics rhetorical methods speakers and writers use to develop arguments strategies rhetorical a question to which no answer is expected question rubrics a set of rules; standards syntax the rules of language; grammar thesis an unproved statement used as a premise in an argument; a claim advancing a point of view in an argument 2TiC=C a three-part argument map that uses induction as the method of organization: 2TiC (two body paragraphs) = C (conclusion) 3TiC=C a four-part argument map that uses induction as the method of organization: 3TiC (two body paragraphs) = C (conclusion) to blank out to forget suddenly; to stop thinking suddenly to construct for TOEFL, to develop and deliver verbal and written arguments to digress to move in a different direction to formulate to develop; to construct to imply to see or read a suggestion in a statement to infer to make a conclusion based on the facts presented in a statement to map out to show graphically how different parts logically connect to construct a whole; to make a plan to flame to scream at someone in writing using capital letters to rate for TOEFL, rating (measuring) the proficiency of verbal and written arguments according to a set of standardized rubrics to overstate to say too much; to exaggerate verbal spoken Also From Nova Press Master the LSAT (608 pages; includes software and 4 official exams) GMAT Prep Course (624 page; includes software and online course) The M CAT Physics Book (444 pages) The M CAT Chemistry Book (496 pages) SAT Prep Course (640 pages; includes software) Law School Basics: A Preview of Law School and Legal Reasoning (224 pages) Vocabularly 4000: 4000 Words for an Educated Vocabulary (160 pages) Nova Press 11659 Mayfield Avenue Los Angeles, CA USA 90049 1-800-949-6175 info@novapress.net www.novapress.net 1 TOEFL iBT Tips, How to Prepare for the TOEFL iBT, Page 26, Educational Testing Services, 2008 2 TOEFL iBT Tips, How to Prepare for the TOEFL iBT, Page 26, Educational Testing Services, 2008 Document Outline Cover Title Page Copyright Contents TOEFL iBT Facts Acknowledgements To the Test-Taker Chapter 1 - Developing an Argument Arguments and the TOEFL iBT What is an Argument?

Personal-Opinion Argument: Deduction Rhetorical Strategies Personal-Opinion Argument: Induction Developing Your Opinion Fact-Based Argument: Deduction Fact-Based Argument: Induction Coherence = A High Score Argument Mapping G+3TiC=C Task Order Chapter 2 - Independent Essay G+3TiC=C Basic Independent Essay Agree-Disagree Prompts OPDUL=C Preference Prompts Compare-and-Contrast Prompts Advantage-Disadvantage Prompts Reason Prompts Quality Prompts Writing Practice Advanced Introduction Strategies Simple Hooks Complex Hooks Advanced Thesis Strategies Predictor Thesis Writing a Predictor Thesis Predictor Thesis: Parallelism Gerund Predictor Thesis Predictor Thesis: Using Synonyms 1. Predictor Thesis: When to Write 2. Predictor Thesis: When to Write Advanced Conclusion Strategies Advanced Independent Essays Emergency Independent Essay Contrarian Response Writing Practice What Have You Learned?

Chapter 3 - Integrated Essay Argument-Counter Argument Essay ETSs Testing Method Argument-Counter Argument: Step-by-Step The Black-and-White Rule Organization: Point-by-Point Style Organization: Block Style Paraphrasing 2. Argument-Counter Argument: Step-by-Step Three Common Problems Writing Practice Show-Support Essay Show Support: Step-by-Step Writing Practice Emergency Integrated Essay What Have You Learned?

Chapter 4 - Speaking Task One Independent Task: Single-Question Prompt OPDUL=C Delivery Speaking Subjectively Basic Response 1. Basic Response: Step-by-Step Rating Yourself Rating in a Class How Long Should My Response Be?

2. Basic Response: Step-by-Step 3. Basic Response: Step-by-Step Four Common Problems Help! - My Response is Too Long!

Help! - My Response is Too Short!

Advanced Strategies Advanced Introduction Strategies Predictor Thesis The Rhetorical Why Advanced Conclusion Strategies Advanced Responses Emergency Response Contrarian Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

Chapter 5 - Speaking Task Two 1. Agree-Disagree Prompt: Step-by-Step 2. Agree-Disagree Prompt: Step-by-Step Support-Dont Support Prompt: Step-by-Step Preference Prompt: Step-by-Step Argument-Counter Argument: Step-by-Step Advantage-Disadvantage: Step-by-Step Speaking Practice More Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

Chapter 6 - Speaking Task Three Integrated Task: Read-Listen-Speak ETSs Testing Method Developing a Response: Step-by-Step How Long Should My Response Be?

Five Common Problems Help! - My Response is Too Long!

Help! - My Response is Too Short!

Emergency Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

Chapter 7 - Speaking Task Four Integrated Task: Read-Listen-Speak ETSs Testing Method Developing a Response: Step-by-Step How Long Should My Response Be?

Four Common Problems Emergency Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

Chapter 8 - Speaking Task Five Integrated Task: Listen-Speak ETSs Testing Method Developing a Response: Step-by-Step How Long Should My Response Be?

Contrarian Response Three Common Problems Emergency Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

Chapter 9 - Speaking Task Six Integrated Task: Listen-Speak ETSs Testing Method Developing a Response: Step-by-Step How Long Should My Response Be?

Three Common Problems Emergency Response Speaking Practice What Have You Learned?

Appendix Scoring Independent Essay Proficiency Checklist Independent Essay Rating Guide Integrated Essay Proficiency Checklist Integrated Essay Rating Guide Independent Speaking Proficiency Checklist Independent Speaking Rating Guide Integrated Speaking Proficiency Checklist Integrated Speaking Rating Guide Exercises Exercise: Identifying Rhetorical Strategies Exercise: Identifying Opinions Exercise: Checking for Parallelism Exercise: Gerund Predictors Answer Key Answers: Identifying Rhetorical Strategies Answers: Identifying Opinions Answers: Checking for Parallelism Answers: Gerund Predictors Independent Essay Rating Agree-Disagree Prompt Preference Prompt Compare-Contrast Prompt Advantage-Disadvantage Prompt Advantage Prompt Disadvantage Prompt Reason Prompts Quality Prompt Advanced Independent Essays Integrated Essay Ratings Speaking Task Ratings Audio Scripts Glossary Also From Nova Press