The Art of Newborn Photography The Art of Newborn Photography Melanie East AMPA First published in 2017 by The Crowood Press Ltd Ramsbury, Marlborough Wiltshire SN8 2HR www.crowood.com This e-book first published in 2017  Melanie East 2017 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

ISBN 978 1 78500 219 9 Dedication For my gorgeous husband Simon and our beautiful daughter Amelia.

CONTENTS Introduction 1 The photographerclient relationship 2 Lighting 3 Camera and lenses 4 Props and preparation 5 Safety and settling 6 Newborn posing 7 Real-life case studies 8 Older babies 9 Post-production About the author List of suppliers Glossary Acknowledgements Index Introduction Newborn and baby photography is the fastest growing genre of portrait photography in the UK. Many professional photographers are turning away from other genres of photography to tap into the newborn and baby photography market and similarly, many stay-at-home mothers are turning their hand to baby photography, as they feel it is a profession which they can work around their children. The introduction of digital photography, together with the fact that a semi-professional camera can be purchased for under 500, means that photography is now a far more accessible profession than it has ever been before.

There is far more to newborn photography, however, than just taking a photograph; with it comes the responsibility of handling and caring for a newborn baby. The photographer must understand the needs of the newborn and its parents, and should be well versed in safety, as well as maintaining a calm environment while carrying out a session.

The intention of this book is to arm the reader with an initial knowledge of newborn and baby photography. Please note that it is not a replacement for professional training; those who wish to carry out the art of newborn photography should invest in training from an experienced and qualified trainer before attempting to pose newborn babies.

WHY NEWBORN AND BABY PHOTOGRAPHY?

Newborn and baby photography is a very special genre of portrait photography. No other portraiture has such a limited window of time in which to capture the emotional first few days of life; at no other stage do children change and develop so quickly  almost on a daily basis. Capturing an image within that narrow window of opportunity ensures that parents memories of their tiny little baby will stay with them for ever. Many parents wish that they could stop time and remember their baby exactly as they were at the newborn stage. As a newborn photographer, you are allowing them to do just that, and the images that you produce will be amongst the most precious that any parent will have.

As a newborn photographer you will need to develop a certain set of skills: endless patience, giving confidence to the parent to entrust their precious bundle to you, and an aura of calm no matter what the photography session throws at you. You will need to handle a newborn baby confidently and safely, and become the ultimate baby whisperer. You will need to learn to be creative with setting up your shots, and you will need to think on your feet: no two newborn sessions are ever the same. You will definitely need to learn to be comfortable with being pooped and pee-ed on  this is a hazard of the job!

The results, however, become family heirlooms and the reaction of the parents on seeing their newborn captured beautifully as art is a reward in itself.

This will book will aim to guide you through everything you need to know from preparing for the newborn session right through to post-production.

Chapter 1 The photographerclient relationship THE CLIENT It is a privilege to be asked to photograph a newborn baby, and your relationship with the client is therefore an incredibly special one. That very first point of contact could lead to an established, lasting relationship where you are likely to become the clients family photographer and will go on to photograph siblings, cousins, even grandparents and the clients friends babies.

Whereas all photography commissions are important, a newborn photography commission carries with it the additional responsibility of ensuring that your client is happy with you handling, posing, lighting and photographing their vulnerable newborn baby, who in many cases may be under a week old.

The client needs to know that their babys safety and well-being is paramount, and to have full confidence in your ability. After all, they are paying a specialist and will expect a service that is second to none. If you have received specialist newborn photography training then your website should clearly state this.

It is good practice to make a point of explaining to the client during their first point of contact exactly how newborn sessions usually run and what they can expect. This not only helps you in managing the clients expectations, but shows you have an in-depth knowledge of newborn babies. It is also important that the parents follow several steps in advance of the session to help the session run as smoothly as possible. A welcome pack can be sent by email, which explains the session in more detail, advises them what to wear and what to bring, and also includes your studios terms and conditions.

It is important to remember that your client is in the first few days with their new baby. With this in mind, if it is their first baby, this will be a totally new, disorientating and exhausting experience for them. In all likelihood they will have had little sleep and will be emotional. Be prepared to make allowances in the way that they communicate with you: dont expect an email response within five minutes or even five hours! You will need to be sensitive in the way in which you communicate with your client, and understand that this photography session is probably one of a thousand things they have to deal with during the course of one day.

ENVIRONMENT A calm environment is essential for a successful session. With this in mind, it is very important to remain very calm even if the session is not going as planned. If you become stressed then the baby (and certainly the parents) will pick up on that. Whereas newborn babies dont speak or interact as such, you will need to develop a skill in being able to connect with older babies, who often respond well to constant chatting and smiling from you.

Always remain patient, confident and as relaxed as possible, and emphasize to your clients the importance of maintaining a stress-free environment. Mothers can become stressed and upset if they hear their baby cry  if the photographer sees a mother become stressed then she should reassure the mother, and ask if they would like a cuddle with their baby.

You should keep your studio or working environment at around 26C (80F) to ensure that the newborn baby is neither too hot nor too cold (and you should explain this to the client). Babies lose body temperature quickly once unclothed and it is for this reason that the room must remain warm. It is good practice to heat the studio before the client arrives. It is also a good idea to explain that while baby will be lovely and warm, the parents may get too hot and therefore it is best if they wear layers!

You will need to provide comfortable seating and refreshments for the parents, who will be with you for several hours. Having a coffee machine to hand, together with water, juice and snacks will greatly enhance their experience of the session. They will feel looked after and will be able to relax  this may be the first time they have left the house since their baby was born. Cushions should be provided for the mother to sit on to ensure comfort; remember that she may have been out of hospital for only a few days and may be very sore.

Bathroom facilities should be provided.

Finally, it is good practice to ask the parents to bring a book or their laptop, so that they can catch up with thank you letters or other admin, or just to keep themselves entertained. Internet access should be provided, if possible.

CREATING YOUR OWN HOME STUDIO As a newborn photographer, it is not necessary to invest in a commercial high street studio; many newborn photographers work from home and create a space either in their living room or the spare room.

Some photographers (understandably) do not wish clients to enter their home, preferring to keep this a private space, and consider building a studio within their garden, or making use of an existing outbuilding or garage. This is an excellent idea and one which can be achieved relatively inexpensively. There are many off-the-shelf garden offices, which may be purchase online and then installed. Alternatively you may wish to commission a builder to create a building from scratch. Make sure you are fully aware of local planning restrictions before embarking on building projects.

Whether you decide to build your own studio, use an existing room within your home, or convert, say, a garage, careful attention must be given to the kind of light you would wish to shoot in. I designed my studio around my wish to shoot in both natural and artificial light. It has a light, airy feel that is welcoming to clients, with a sitting area and a shooting area. When building the studio, careful consideration was given to insulation and ventilation. The building was then painted a dark brown colour and cleverly planted with trees and shrubs so as to blend in with its surroundings. My business model is built on low-volume, higher-spend clients; as such there is not a marked rise in traffic, meaning that there is minimal disruption to neighbours.

PACING THE SESSION It is a good idea to pre-inform the client regarding the length of the session. That way, the client knows to expect to spend a good few hours with you. Three hours is the average time for a newborn session, but you will find that this will differ depending on the baby and how easily they sleep. Managing the clients expectations in advance means that the client will not be looking at their watch wondering why you havent yet started photographing their baby when you are still trying to get the baby into a deep enough sleep to be able to create newborn poses! The session is set at the babys pace and will take as long as necessary to allow for feeds, cuddles, and rocking to sleep. That said, I do cap my sessions at three hours for single babies and four hours for twins.

A lot of photographers are put off by parents watching their every move during a newborn photography session. This is something that you will need to expect and get used to. You are handling a parents special bundle of joy who is just a matter of days old. If you have not met the parents in advance then remember that they do not know you  it is therefore to be expected that you will feel their eyes boring into your back!

You should never ever rush a newborn session. Remember that safety is paramount; rushing a session could mean you make mistakes, and the baby is more likely to wake up.

STYLE Newborn photography is a creative industry and with that in mind it is important to create your own style in order to stand out from your competition. I am known by my clients not only for my use of rustic woods, textures and props, but also for creating images which are timeless and clean, with the focus always on the baby. This style came about because I live in the countryside and love all things rustic, taking inspiration from the colour palettes around me and developing my style from there.

Developing your style can take time, and it isnt something you can rush, so dont be concerned if you dont have a style straight away. Take a look at your surroundings and consider whether you are drawn to colour or to neutrals. Consider whether you are drawn to modern imagery or more traditional imagery. Will you be shooting lifestyle natural images of a newborn or posed images? Do you absolutely love pastel colours, or are you more drawn to bright colours? All these are elements that can help you define your style. You could even create a mood board of colours or images that inspire you.

When you are starting out, it is hard not to stare at your peers work and wish that your work were exactly like theirs. Really though, you should be aiming to be you, with your own distinct style. You will find that your clients will book you because they love your work and your work will take on a style that can be recognized by others. Clients will be drawn to the look of your images, whether that is bright and airy, or lower key imagery  or a mix of both!

Once you find your style, it is important to stay true to it. That said, as a photographer you should constantly evolve and push yourself. Those who push themselves creatively and out of their comfort zone become the more successful photographers. Pushing yourself also ensures that you never get bored with your work.

Fig. 1 The rustic nature of the wood tones beautifully with the chosen fabrics in this image.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 2 Muted brown tones complement the babys head of dark hair and provide a beautiful contrast to the babys skin tone.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Chapter 2 Lighting An understanding of light can make your work stand out from that of a mediocre photographer; without the proper use of light, however, it is possible to ruin what could otherwise have been a super photograph.

If you are a photographer who works in the clients own homes, then you will need to decide whether you will photograph using available natural light, or artificial light. Many photographers who shoot out on location take their own studio lighting with them to ensure that they will be able to light the shot exactly as they wish. Essential artificial light items for a mobile photographer include a lightweight light, a sturdy light stand, a portable soft box and a flash trigger.

If you decide not to take your own lighting with you then you will need to shoot with whatever available natural light there is. This could mean that on a dull day in a house with small windows, there is very little. This can be overcome by using a fast lens (a lens with a wide aperture) and increasing your ISO. Always be aware, however, that increasing your ISO too much will result in grainy imagery.

If you are a photographer who works in a studio environment then you will be able to control the light exactly as you wish using artificial light sources such as flash or continuous light.

NATURAL LIGHT Photographers who shoot in clients homes, or in their own studio using natural light alone, will need to make use of window light. The quality of the light may be hard or soft and this depends on how large the light source is (for natural light indoor photographers this will be the window). The light from the sun on a sunny day is hard light as it casts deep shadows and is strong and direct. Hard light produces hard shadows. The light on a cloudy day provides soft light with shadows that have soft edges. Images shot in hard light are usually full of contrast whereas images shot in soft light usually have very little contrast.

The nearer the subject is to the available window light, then the softer the light. The further away the subject is from the light then the harsher the light.

A cloudy day is great for newborn photography, because you are then able to use a window where the light is shining directly in. The clouds act as a giant soft box and will diffuse the light, making it lovely and soft. This results in a very pretty light. On a dull cloudy day the photographer may consider using a reflector to bounce light from a light source onto the subject.

If it is a sunny day, then it is a good idea to look for a spot where the sun isnt shining directly in but where you still have a good amount of available light. You can also diffuse (soften) the light by using sheer curtains such as voile panels. In the UK we are not always blessed with bright days and this is particularly true during the winter months. Therefore when using natural light alone the photographer will need to use a sufficiently high ISO and wide aperture to ensure a properly exposed image.

If you are a mobile photographer who photographs in clients homes then it might be wise to invest in a small studio light set-up to take with you. It is far better to attend a clients home prepared, knowing that you can control the light, than arriving and realizing the client has very small windows producing very little light! The bonus of shooting with artificial light is that once your light is set up, you can concentrate on the posing and safety of the baby, without worrying too much about continually changing your exposures.

Fig. 3 Elinchrom lights and soft boxes produce a beautiful soft light perfect for newborns.

Colour casts Look at your surroundings when shooting to ensure that there are no colours nearby which may produce a colour cast onto the babys skin tone. Photographing a newborn baby on a red blanket, for example, would produce a red colour cast onto the babys skin. Whereas colour casts can be removed in post-production, it is a good idea to try to avoid them altogether.

Fig. 4 Essential artificial light items.

LEARNING HOW TO SEE LIGHT When starting out, it can take time to learn how to see light. One of the most important things to be aware of is the direction of the light, as this has a significant bearing on how your final images will look.

The direction of the light (whether natural or artificial) dictates which parts of the subject are in light and shade. Light and shadow are very important, because without both present, the photographer will end up with a very flat looking image, where the image takes on a two-dimensional look. It is the shadows that provide a three-dimensional look to photographs. Humans are three-dimensional, so it follows that photographs should show that.

The photographer may learn how to see light by taking time to notice how light falls on objects and people and taking note of whether there are catch-lights (a white dot of reflected light) in a persons eye. Catchlights will take on the shape of the light source, whether that is a rectangular window, or a round softbox. A good tip when you are out and about is to carry a marble in your pocket. Look at the marble and see where light appears in it. Change your direction until you see catchlights in the marble. This will help you in learning how to see light.

Fig. 5 This image was shot with natural light from a window which was camera left. The window was approximately two feet away from the baby, allowing soft shadow.

ISO 800 1/60 /4 Fig. 6 The window is approximately two feet from the beanbag frame. This allows for soft light to fall on the surface of the beanbag.

Fig. 7 The strobe is lined up with the edge of the beanbag at 90 to ensure feathered light.

Feathered lighting The most popular and flattering light for newborn photography is feathered light. This produces consistently beautiful results and tends to be the preferred lighting set-up of newborn photographers. The idea is to softly feather the light across the newborns face. To achieve this effect you position your studio light in line with the front of your beanbag at 90 degrees to the beanbag. If using natural light, place the beanbag at the edge of the window.

Shooting into light Shooting into the light can produce lovely results and give dimension to an image. When photographing newborns you need to simply position yourself so that you shoot into the dark side of the face. This can result in absolutely beautiful lighting that really picks out the form of the babys face. These images can look particularly stunning when processed in black and white.

Fig. 8 Shooting into the dark side of the face makes for a beautiful image.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Chapter 3 Camera and lenses THE CAMERA An essential requirement for newborn and baby photography is a single lens reflex camera (SLR), either digital or film. This is one where you are able to shoot in manual mode should you wish to do so (as this will give you the most creativity) and where you are able to change lenses. There are a variety of excellent semi-professional and professional cameras on the market. Digital SLRs are the best option for newborn and baby photography, as you can immediately check your histogram for exposure and the image on the back of the camera for expression.

The SLR camera that you choose for professional newborn and baby photography should be capable of creating very high-resolution images and be able to shoot in both RAW and JPEG formats (see below). Many professional cameras now have a dual card slot, meaning that if one card corrupts, you still have the images backed up to the second card. When purchasing an SLR remember that a good lens is very important: the quality of the lens will affect the final image.

A variety of well-known brands of professional digital SLRs are available and photographers should research the market thoroughly to make sure that they invest in the right camera for their needs.

Fig. 9 A Canon full frame SLR. Full frame cameras have a higher ISO performance, which is useful when shooting in natural light.

Full frame or cropped sensor?

Full frame cameras are more expensive than those with a cropped sensor.

In film photography a 35mm camera takes an image that is approximately 35mm in width. In other words, what you see is what you get. If you are using a camera with a cropped sensor then the sensor is smaller than that on a full frame camera, meaning that it is cropping out the edges of the frame; this effectively increases your focal length. The difference in the focal length of a camera with a cropped sensor is measured by its multiplier.

If you have a 50mm lens on a full frame camera, then you will have a field of view of 50mm. A 50mm lens on a cropped sensor camera has a field of view of 50mm  1.5 crop factor which gives you 75mm. This means that to get the same effect as a 75mm lens using a cropped sensor camera you would need to use a 50mm lens.

If you intend to photograph in natural light then the photographer should consider purchasing a full frame camera, as the high ISO performance is excellent and superior to cameras with cropped sensors.

DIGITAL IMAGE FILE FORMATS DSLRs will allow you to shoot in two different formats: RAW and JPEG. The relative merits of each are discussed below.

RAW A RAW file is also an uncompressed file. It is not processed within the camera; in other words, all of the information is untouched and uncompressed from the sensor. RAW files are therefore incredibly large and use a huge amount of memory, not only in camera but also on computers when processing the images.

A RAW file does not have a colour space attached to it. This means that if you choose to shoot in black and white in camera, the RAW file will show as colour  you decide in post-production how you wish your file to look.

RAW is the preferred method of shooting for professional photographers. Although RAW files take up a lot of memory on memory cards, the cost of memory cards has lessened so much in price that memory is now relatively cheap.

RAW files are much more forgiving in terms of exposure: if you make an error with your exposure in camera, you can often recover it. If you shoot in JPEG you have to ensure that your exposure is pretty close to perfect, errors cannot be as easily corrected.

JPEG This is probably the best known file format and is globally accepted. It also takes up far less space both on your camera and on your computer.

A JPEG file is a compressed file which is produced by the information in the camera. Unlike a TIFF or a RAW file, it is a lossy file, meaning that some information is discarded. Remember that you are able to shoot in RAW and then convert the images to JPEG in post-production.

Unlike RAW files, JPEG files will deteriorate if a lot of changes are made to the image in post-production. A JPEG file has a lower dynamic range, and therefore when you are adjusting your images, particularly the colour balance, the outcome can be less predictable than with a RAW file.

Many professional cameras will allow you to shoot both RAW and JPEG together  either on the same memory card or on two separate memory cards (which is a great way of having an extra backup of your files).

For newborn and baby photography it is recommended that you photograph using RAW format then post-produce them. This gives you far more flexibility with regard to the final look of your image. The images you produce to your client should be in JPEG format.

MEMORY CARDS Memory cards store the images you shoot as you shoot. You remove the memory card from the camera in order to download the images to your computer.

Memory cards come in a variety of different capacities, from 1GB through to 256GB. The capacity of the memory card determines how many images it will store and how quickly it can read and write the data it records.

There are two main types of memory card: Compact Flash (CF cards), or Secure Digital (SD cards). Always remember to back up the data on your memory cards straight after a shoot.

Fig. 10 Memory cards now come with large storage capacity.

LENSES A large variety of lenses of varying quality are available for photographers. In the Canon range, the professional lenses have the suffix L (for example the Canon 2470 2.8L), and are also identified by a red ring around the barrel of the lens.

Zoom lenses (variable focal length) A zoom lens (for example a 2470mm or a 70200mm) does not have a fixed focal length, meaning that you as the photographer have more flexibility when photographing a subject who is unpredictable (such as, say, a nine-month-old baby who may be crawling around quickly). A zoom lens allows you to adjust the focal length without needing to change the lens, so you can take full-length, mid-length and close-up shots quickly.

Fig. 11 The 2470mm zoom lens is a popular choice for newborn photography.

A popular choice for newborn and baby photography is the 2470mm 2.8 lens. Note, however, that distortion can occur particularly when shooting close up (24mm for example); this may result in an unflattering image.

Prime lenses (fixed focal length) A prime lens has a fixed focal length: in order to create close-up images you would need to move further toward the subject; to create a full-length image you would need to move further away. Recommended prime lenses for baby photography are the 50mm and 85mm lenses.

Fig. 12 This 50mm lens is an example of a great prime lens for newborn portraiture.

The benefit of using a prime lens is that it forces you to be more creative, as you really do need to look at your subject and consider composition and then decide which lens would create the best image.

Prime lenses often have wider apertures than zoom lenses  some as low as 1.2  and are therefore invaluable in low light conditions. Lenses with wide apertures such as these are also known as fast lenses as the light can reach the sensor in a digital camera quickly, allowing a faster shutter speed.

Macro lenses A macro lens is also a prime lens, and it enables the photographer to photograph details up close. Macro lenses allow a short focusing distance and can capture an object at the same size as the actual object the photographer is shooting. This is known as 1:1 magnification ratio. Check the lens to see if it says MACRO, then consult your lens manual for the magnification or specifications.

Fig. 13 A macro lens has a fixed focal length and is perfect for capturing those baby details.

Image stabilization Professional lenses are often equipped with image stabilization (Canon), or vibration reduction (Nikon). If you are a photographer who shoots in natural light then a lens equipped with image stabilization is essential as it enables you to shoot at a lower shutter speed and still obtain sharp images. The lens will indicate if it has image stabilization.

Fig. 14 A lens will indicate if it has image stabilization (Canon) or vibration reduction (Nikon).

Which lens you choose for newborn and baby photography will depend on whether you are a natural light photographer (where you may be working in lower light), in which case you may wish to choose a prime lens with a wide aperture such as the 50mm 1.2 or 1.4, or whether you are a photographer using artificial light, in which case the 2470mm or the 24105mm with image stabilization may be for you.

PREPARING THE CAMERA Before you start to use your camera you should thoroughly read the manual to ensure that you are completely familiar with the cameras features and how to control them.

Always ensure that the battery is fully charged, and aim to have a spare (fully charged) battery available. This is particularly important when you may be shooting outdoors without an available power point for recharging the battery.

Ensure that your lenses are clean and that your sensor is free of dust. Large particles of dust can form on the cameras sensor and can then be seen on the resulting photographs. Whereas this can be removed using post-production software, it saves time if you ensure the sensor is clean to begin with. The more up to date digital SLRs have an automatic sensor cleaning ability, but it is good practice to get the sensor cleaned professionally on a periodic basis.

Insert a formatted memory card, and always ensure that you have spare formatted memory cards to hand. Once you have shot on a card it is good practice to put that card away safely. Cards should be numbered and a card should ideally not be re-used until the job has been delivered to the client. Keeping the images on the cards serves as yet another backup and it cannot do any harm to have additional backups of your images. Many professional SLR cameras have dual card slots (the camera will record the images to both cards at once), so that if one card fails, you still have the images on the other card.

FOCUSING THE CAMERA Whether you are using an entry level or a professional level SLR, it is essential that you learn how to properly focus your camera in order to achieve sharp images. It is not possible to repair a poorly focused image effectively using post-production software. The beauty of using a digital SLR is that you can immediately see whether your subject is in focus by checking the back of the camera. You should aim to focus on the babys eyes  or the nearest eye if baby is lying on her side.

Manual focus (M) Whereas all professional and semi-professional digital cameras can focus the lens automatically, they also allow you to focus manually instead. This is a great option for newborn macro photography  photographing baby details such as eyelashes and mouth  as it stops your lens from moving in and out, trying to search for the focus point. Manual focus would not be suitable for photographing older babies, however, since they are likely to be moving around (focusing manually would be frustrating in this situation, not to mention time-consuming).

Auto-focus (AF) Many newborn and baby photographers choose to shoot using their cameras auto-focusing option (AF). This is particularly useful with crawling babies. The auto-focus/manual focus function can be found on the side of your camera (labelled AF/MF).

Briefly, there are two types of auto-focus systems, known as active and passive. The active AF system works by shooting a red beam onto your subject and then bouncing that light back to your camera. By doing that it works out the distance between the camera and the subject, and is then able to tell the lens to change the focus accordingly. This is very useful in low light where passive AF doesnt work. Many Nikon and Canon speed lights have AF assist modes, which use the active AF system.

The passive AF system can only be used on still, relatively near subjects. The passive AF system works by detecting contrast in the image that is, it tries to look for sharpness. If you are in a room with very low available light, or are shooting a very flat image such as a plain coloured wall, then you will find that the system will struggle and will search for focus. In this situation it would be best to switch to manual focus. An example of this is when trying to shoot a grey card for colour balance.

There are typically three auto-focus (AF) modes from which to choose: one-shot, continuous, and automatic. These auto-focus modes are sophisticated systems but they are not entirely foolproof.

When looking through the viewfinder, the photographer will see a grid of small empty squares or dots, called focusing points. They will light up, usually in red, when they have focused on the subject. If they dont light up then the camera has not focused on the subject. Often there will also be a green round light which will flash in the corner of the viewfinder when you depress the shutter, showing that the subject is not in focus. A steady green light indicates that the subject is in focus.

Fig. 15 Always be sure to focus on the eyes. This image shows both closed eyes in focus.

ISO 160 1/160 /4.5 Fig. 16 Most lenses will have a switch on the side allowing you to select auto-focus or manual focus.

One-shot auto-focus mode This is relatively straightforward and is where the photographer is able to control the part of the image that is to be in focus. This can be in any part of the grid. Many photographers like to select a central focus point and then reposition the camera in order to recompose the shot.

Continuous/AI servo focus mode This mode can be used for photographing moving subjects and is widely used by sport or wildlife photographers where the moving subject needs to be tracked. AI servo tracks focus on moving subjects so as your subject moves closer or moves further away your camera constantly updates focus to keep the subject as sharp as possible.

Automatic/AI focus mode This mode can be used for photographing both still and moving subjects. The camera will detect if the subject is moving, and if so, it will automatically switch to AI servo focus mode. If the subject is still then the camera will automatically switch to one-shot focus mode.

As mentioned earlier, it is important to read the cameras manual to familiarize yourself with the cameras auto-focus system.

METERING LIGHT Metering is the manner in which your camera determines what the correct aperture and shutter speed should be, depending on the amount of light that goes into the camera, and the sensitivity of the sensor.

Metering light effectively will help achieve well-exposed images. All digital SLR cameras have an integrated metering system that measures reflected light and determines the best exposure. The most common metering modes are described below.

Evaluative metering (also known as matrix metering or multi-zone metering) This is the default metering mode on most digital SLRs. It works by dividing the entire frame into zones, which are then analysed individually for light and dark tones. It then takes an average for all of the zones and determines the exposure based on that figure, giving a satisfactory overall exposure. There are other variables used in arriving at the correct exposure and these differ depending on the manufacturer of the camera. For example, Nikon metering systems also compare the image to a huge database of pictures when determining the exposure for similar scenes.

Centre weighted metering Centre weighted metering gives priority, usually between 60 to 80 per cent, to the light that is within a circular area in the centre of the frame (some cameras allow you to adjust the size of the circle). This is often considered to be a consistent form of metering, given that a lot of photographic subjects are near the centre of the frame and rarely in the four corners. The photographer should be aware, however, that it can be influenced by very large areas of dark and light.

Spot metering Spot metering will only evaluate the light around your focus point. The meter will evaluate a single zone and calculate the exposure based on that area alone, which is usually between 1 per cent and 5 per cent of the overall image. Spot metering is often considered to provide the most accurate readings, as the area from which the reading is taken is accurate. Spot metering is an excellent tool for back-lit images.

Partial metering Partial metering is also considered a good option for back-lit images. It evaluates from a larger area, usually around 10 to 15 per cent of the frame.

THE HISTOGRAM The histogram is a tool that allows the photographer to get a summary of the tonal range within an image. It should be noted that it is only a guide as to correct exposure. It can indicate whether or not your image has been properly exposed, what adjustments will need to be made in post-production, and whether the lighting is flat. It should be remembered that the histogram should be used as a guide and is useful for those who cannot see from looking at their images whether they are over- or under-exposed. The main use of a histogram is to identify where areas of detail have been lost in an image, whether in the shadows or in the highlights.

The far left of the histogram records the shadows (complete black at 0). The far right of the histogram records the highlights (complete white at 255) and in between those two points is a record of the midtones, in varying shades of grey.

After taking a photograph, look at the histogram in the camera to ensure a proper exposure. The key to a proper exposure is an even distribution of the tones throughout the dynamic range. The photographer should bear in mind that a correct exposure will not always have a balanced histogram, as this will depend on the tones in the image  if there are more light tones then the points may fall more to the right; if there are more dark tones then the points will fall more to the left.

Fig. 17 The histogram is spiked to the right, showing that the image may be over-exposed.

Fig. 18 The histogram is spiked to the left, showing that the image may be underexposed.

Fig. 19 The histogram is evenly spread, showing a correctly exposed image.

If when looking at your histogram you see the histogram hitting the peak of the far right of the scale then reduce the exposure; if you see the histogram hitting the far left of the peak of the scale then increase your exposure.

The photographer should not rely completely on the back of the LCD screen to check whether the image is exposed, as it may be incorrect if the brightness of the camera LCD screen is improperly set. This is why the histogram is a useful tool.

If the points of the histogram peak at the edge of the scale on the right, this could indicate that areas of the image are over-exposed, which means that detail in the image may be lost. Over-exposed areas of pure white cannot be recovered in post-production, since there is no detail to recover.

WHITE BALANCE Your camera will allow you to adjust the white balance (the warmth or coolness of white light). The white balance setting you choose will change the colour balance of your images, making them warmer or cooler depending on the type of light in which you are shooting. Correct camera white balance must take into account the colour temperature of a light source. Different sources of light have a different temperature (or colour) to them; for example, tungsten lightbulbs add a yellow tone to photographs whereas fluorescent light adds a blue tone.

Fig. 20 Grey cards are used to set your white balance.

Digital cameras have the preset white balance settings described below. It should be noted that these are just rough estimates for the lighting in which they work best.

Auto: where the camera decides on the best white balance on a shot-by-shot basis Tungsten (lightbulb symbol): used for shooting indoors under tungsten light and will generally cool down the colour of your images Daylight (sun symbol): for normal daylight Cloudy (cloud symbol): used for shooting outside in cloudy weather and will warm up your images a touch Flash (lightning bolt symbol): used for shooting with on-camera flash and will warm your images a little Shade (symbol of a house casting a shadow): shade light is a bluer light and therefore this setting will warm up your images a little Fluorescent (long rectangle symbol): has a blue colour to it and therefore using this mode will warm up your images a little.

Custom setting Some photographers prefer to leave their camera setting on auto white balance and let the camera do the guesswork, allowing them to make any adjustments to the white balance at a later date in post-production. However, in an ideal world the photographer should aim to get everything right in camera, thus minimizing the amount of post-production work necessary. For this reason, custom setting your white balance is a good idea. This is a very simple procedure which is carried out by holding up a grey card in the same light in which you will photograph your subject, and taking a photograph of it ensuring that it fills the whole screen. You then load the image you have taken of the grey card into the camera under custom.

EXPOSURE The exposure of an image will determine how light or dark an image will appear when it has been captured. This is determined by three settings: ISO, shutter speed and aperture ( stop). The combination of aperture, shutter speed and ISO is referred to as the exposure triangle. The three variables, when used properly, allow the photographer to properly control the light entering the camera, resulting in a correctly exposed image.

ISO Before digital cameras existed, a photographer would have chosen a film according to its light sensitivity. This is known as the ISO/ASA value, or the speed of the film. For a bright, sunny day a film with a low ISO, such as a 100 ISO film, would have been appropriate; for a darker day, a film with a higher ISO (400) would have been chosen. If a film with a different speed was required, the film would have to be changed.

With the invention of the digital camera, changing of film is no longer necessary, and the ISO represents how sensitive the cameras sensor is to light.

A high ISO (ISO 2000) produces more noise (grain) but is more sensitive to light A low ISO (ISO 100) produces no noise (grain) but requires a lot of light Aperture Put simply, the aperture is the hole in the lens through which light travels into the camera. It can either blur the background or bring everything into focus depending on which  stop you choose. The distance between the nearest and furthest areas that are in focus is known as depth of field.

A large aperture (e.g. /1.2) lets in more light, which results in a small depth of field (only a small amount of the image is in focus) A small aperture (e.g. /8) lets in less light, which results in a large depth of field (more of the image is in focus) Therefore, a smaller  stop means a larger aperture, whereas a larger  stop means a smaller aperture. (Many new photographers find this confusing, as they are used to having large numbers represent a larger value and smaller numbers represent a smaller value  but in this case the opposite is true.) Fig. 21 Note that the smaller the number, the larger the opening in the lens, allowing more light in.

Figure 21 may help you understand aperture. The size of the circle represents the size of the lens aperture; the larger the  number, the smaller the aperture.

Every lens will have an indication of how large or how small the aperture can get. The maximum aperture is more important than the minimum aperture because it indicates the speed of the lens and as previously mentioned a lens with an aperture of, say, 1.2 or 1.4 is considered a fast lens because more light can pass through than, say, a lens with a maximum aperture of 5.6. This is particularly important when shooting in low light.

Shutter speed Shutter speed is the time that the cameras shutter is open to allow light to hit the digital sensor. Shutter speed is measured in fractions of a second, if under a second. It can control both camera shake and motion blur. A fast shutter speed (for example 1/1250) lets less light into the sensor, meaning that motion is frozen. A slower shutter speed (for example 1/20) means that the shutter is open longer, meaning that more light hits the sensor. However, shooting at 1/20 without a tripod would result in camera shake and a blurry image.

The shutter speed values are standard across all makes and models of cameras and examples of this are shown below: 1/2000 1/15 1/1000 1/8 1/500 1/4 1/250 1/2 1/125 1 second 1/60 2 seconds 1/30 As a general rule, try to keep your shutter speed at a minimum of the focal length of the lens. For example, when shooting on a 50mm lens your shutter speed should be no less than 1/50th.

Chapter 4 Props and preparation ORGANIZATION If you have a studio dedicated to newborn photography then you should ensure that it is spotlessly clean, tidy, and smells fresh. Props should be neat and tidy and well organized; keep your blankets, wraps and other knitwear neatly folded for easy access. (Note that blankets and wraps should be washed in non-biological liquid without fabric conditioner to ensure that the babys skin is not irritated on coming into contact with it.) The aim is to ensure that the client feels calm and relaxed. A messy, disorganized studio will have the opposite effect.

In order to focus the photographers mind, it is a good idea to keep only the props that are likely to be used  newborn photographers can acquire something of a prop habit  but in order to keep the work fresh and interesting it is a good idea to rotate props, or even to swap props with other photographers.

PLANNING THE SESSION Booking the session As a newborn photographer it is essential that you plan the session with your client well in advance. Newborns change and grow very quickly indeed; with this in mind, the best time to photograph a newborn baby to be able to achieve the curly poses is under fourteen days. All babies are different and you may be able to achieve curly poses with some four-week-old babies, but in my experience younger babies tend to curl into the poses more easily.

It is advisable, therefore, to schedule all newborn sessions between five and fourteen days after birth, where possible. This is not to say, however, that you should turn away older babies. The photographer should ensure she manages the clients expectations  if a client would like to schedule a session for, say nine weeks, then the photographer should explain that the newborn curly poses will not be achievable, but that she can still take beautiful images of their baby. When photographing babies older than fourteen days the photographer may need to concentrate on awake shots with baby on their back, if baby doesnt want to sleep.

Fig. 22 Keeping your props and materials neatly stored will help keep your mind on track.

Newborns dont always arrive on time, and with this in mind, unless the mother has a planned Caesarian section, you cannot give a firm photography appointment to the client. Best practice is to schedule the session for a week after the estimated date of delivery  that way the photographer will have an idea of when baby may arrive, and can schedule in a date. The client will need to let the photographer know as soon as the baby has been born so that this date may be confirmed, or changed as necessary. The photographer will need to leave room in their diary to make adjustment to session changes.

Fig. 23 This sweet little baby woke during his session, allowing me to capture a beautiful shot.

ISO 100 1/160 /2.8 If there are several shoots planned for one week, it can be a juggling act to schedule in all the babies. If you are in this position then it is advisable to schedule the heavier babies into the diary soonest. This is because heavier babies often require more milk, can be more alert and are therefore usually best photographed within the first ten days.

There are advantages and disadvantages in photographing both older and younger babies. The older they are, the more awake they tend to be  this creates wonderful opportunities for awake shots but the client may have her heart set on the curly, asleep poses. The younger they are, the more likely they are to curl up and sleep for longer. As long as you create beautiful images, the client will be delighted.

Fig. 24 These images were shot in natural light, window left.

ISO 800 1/160 /4 The baby shown here (in Figure 24) was six weeks old when photographed, and beautiful awake shots were captured.

It is not advisable to photograph babies who are less than five days old, as it can take a good few days for the mothers milk to become established if she is breastfeeding. Therefore very young babies tend to feed more often as they are not satisfied enough in one feed alone.

Welcome guide It is always good practice to provide your client with a welcome guide which includes a checklist for them to read. This can be emailed to clients, posted, or hosted on issu.com.

Your welcome guide could include the following: What to bring. If a baby is bottle-fed then you should request that they bring enough bottles to feed their baby. If their baby takes a dummy, then they will need to bring sterilized dummies with them.

What to expect during the session. As previously mentioned, it is important that you inform the client how long the session is likely to take, and this is the perfect place to put that information. You could also let them know that you have a supply of nappies, wet wipes, cotton wool and so forth for their use should they need it. Clients will always appreciate this little extra touch and it shows that you are thinking of their needs.

How to prepare for the session. Many foods that breastfeeding mothers consume can affect their baby, and with this in mind it is important to ask nursing mothers to avoid these for twenty-four hours before the session, as some foods can upset a newborns tummy. Examples of foods to avoid could include acidic food such as tomatoes or citrus fruit and some vegetables which can cause tummy upset, such as onions or spices. Within this section of the welcome guide, you could ask the mother to ensure that she feeds her newborn baby just before she leaves the house to come to your studio  this ensures that valuable time is not wasted with the mother feeding the baby at your studio. Some babies can take a long time to feed and you dont want this to cut into your shooting time.

Fig. 25 Welcome guides provide useful information for clients about how to prepare for their session with you.

What to wear. It is helpful if your clients can bring the baby to your studio in a front-opening babygrow. Another helpful tip is to ask the parents not to put a vest on their baby under the babygrow, but to keep the baby warm in the car seat on the way to the studio by using a blanket if necessary. This then avoids you having to take anything off over the babys head, which may wake them, as usually the baby will arrive at the studio asleep. If your clients wish to be photographed too, then appropriate advice should be given to them about what to wear. Plain colours work best, and logos or patterns should be avoided.

Studio policies. It is essential to include this information; many studios, including mine, forbid photography or videography by clients and if this is the case you need to ensure that you state this in advance. If you charge a studio fee then you should also explain that this is nonrefundable, if applicable.

It is important when planning the session to ensure that you use props and colours that the clients like. Whereas the likelihood is that they booked you for your style of photography, it can often be the case that mothers of baby girls dont like pink! Many parents, on seeing that you have already set up the studio, can be too shy to admit that they dont like the colours you have chosen, and this results in smaller sales when it comes to the viewing and ordering session. Therefore it is essential that you talk with clients about their expectations: what kind of images do they wish you to create? Discuss the colours within their house  are they looking, for example, for images to decorate the walls of the nursery? If so, what colour is the nursery? Talking to the client about colour palettes can be incredibly valuable because you can then set up the studio using colours you know they will like, and the client will value your input. It is your job as a photographer not only to create beautiful images, but also to ensure that you are creating images the client wants to buy. Ensuring that you are working with colours, tones and props that the client loves should result in a successful sale.

Siblings When the client books the newborn session with you, it is a good idea to ask if the baby has any siblings the client would like photographed too. This is important because it isnt practical or reasonable to expect other young children to sit in your studio for three hours. Therefore, if the clients decide that they would like siblings photographed, you can suggest that a relative brings the sibling either at the beginning or towards the end of the session. This ensures that you can concentrate on primarily creating beautiful newborn images without worrying about young children in the studio.

Payment The photographer should always take payment for the session at the time of booking. This is to ensure that the client attends their appointment and it is also good for cash flow. The same applies to ordering products: remember that the items you are ordering for the client are bespoke items especially for that client, which cannot be sold on. You do not want to find yourself in the position where you have ordered expensive products and then the client changes their mind.

SETTING UP As previously mentioned, your studio (or the clients home) should be heated in advance to around 80 degrees. Set up your beanbag and stand, and layer three to four blankets to ensure a soft surface on which to pose the baby. Underneath each blanket you should place a pee pad so that if baby has an accident you can swiftly remove the top layer and the blanket below is protected. Always ensure that your beanbag stand is sturdy (many photographers use a frame) and that you are using a professional newborn posing beanbag. These may be purchased from www.babypropshop.com. The professional newborn posing beanbags have a large surface area for safety. It is essential to ensure that you clamp your blankets to the beanbag firmly, stretching the fabric as far as you can to ensure a smooth surface area. This will minimize any post-production work in having to remove wrinkles and creases in the blanket afterwards.

It is useful to keep a bag full of smaller, differently sized and shaped beanbags, which are very useful for providing extra support to the newborn. These are available from various retailers.

Figs 26 and 27 Be prepared  consider the tones and textures you want to use before the session.

Fig. 28 This set-up uses neutral tones with lovely soft textures.

Always remember to use colours that the client has requested. Neutrals and whites work very well but darker colours can also look fantastic.

Fig. 29 This image shows a basket set-up ready for a newborn  the basket and fur show beautiful texture and tone. The backdrop is a vinyl floor (available from www.clickprops.co.uk) Fig. 30 Scales make a beautiful prop  but remember baby must always be supported.

Once you have set up your beanbag, consider the knitwear you would like to use. It is essential to keep a good stock of blankets, wraps, newborn bonnets, hats and headbands and basket stuffers in your studio. Babies are unable to control their bladders and bowel movements, so accidents will happen; an almost unlimited supply of fabrics is therefore essential.

Essential equipment for shooting on location When shooting on location, you will not have the luxury of being able to choose whatever you like whenever you like from the studio; therefore you will need to plan in advance. Consider the shots you want to take and plan accordingly.

The following is a selection of items you will need to take with you when shooting in clients homes.

Camera and memory cards Charger Spare camera battery Beanbag and stand or beanbag frame Lighting (such as a strobe, stand and softbox) Reflector Blankets for the beanbag A variety of hats and wraps Three pre-chosen props (a crate, a bowl and a basket, for example) A flokati or other fluffy rug A vinyl fake floor A change of clothes for yourself (babies have accidents when being cuddled with no clothes on!) Pee pads to layer in between blankets (readily available from Amazon or pet shops) Vinyl fake floors are a superb invention: they allow you to completely change the look of floor and wall simply by hanging the backdrop from the frame to create the wall and using another fake vinyl piece to create the floor. You can be very creative with images when using vinyl backdrops in this way. Look for backdrops that are anti-glare.

Textures and tones Always choose colours that work well with your background fabric but which also will not detract from the baby. You will need to have regard to the babys skin colouring when considering which colours to use (for example, it is not advisable to use yellow when photographing a jaundiced baby).

Always consider texture and tone when setting up your props. Consider the background and how you wish the final image to look. Do the colours work well together? Are they flattering? Do they tone well? Try not to use props that are too fussy and might take the focus away from the baby. Different textures can work very well and create interest in a photograph: layering different fabrics, such as cotton against mohair, can look wonderful.

Choosing props Once you have set up the beanbag, you will need to think about which props you would want to use, again having regard to the clients wishes. Setting three to four props up in advance will allow you to concentrate on the images you wish to create during the session and will keep your mind focused. It is likely that you will have more images in your head than you will actually have time to create; the best advice is not to rush or try to cram too much into the session. It is better to have 25 beautiful images than 50 mediocre images.

Fig. 31 The tones used in this image complement the baby, making for a beautifully warm image. The fake floor provides texture.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Examples of good newborn props could include: Large shallow basket Taller linen basket Large shallow bowl Large flokati or other soft fluffy rug Wooden crate Vinyl floors and backdrops (as mentioned above) Props may be purchased from all sorts of places! You may find items in antique shops, charity shops and of course the newborn photography prop sellers such as www.clickprops.co.uk and www.babypropshop.co.uk. It is essential that any props you use are safe for baby: for example, lightweight baskets should have a weight inside them to stop the basket toppling; all baskets should be smooth, without any wicker poking out that could injure the baby. Always make sure that a prop is large enough to hold a newborn baby and never, ever, leave a newborn baby unattended in a prop.

Chapter 5 Safety and settling The well-being of a newborn baby should be the primary concern of the photographer, over and above any pose or shot; every possible step must therefore be taken to ensure that they are safe whilst in your care.

To achieve the curly poses the newborn baby will need to be asleep. It is not advisable to pose an awake newborn baby as they are likely to startle out of position, which could be unsafe. With that in mind it is good practice to ask the parents to interact with the newborn before they arrive at your studio (or before you arrive at their house if you are a mobile photographer). This way, the baby should be sleepy for the session.

Ensure that the parents are happy and comfortable before you begin. Always bear in mind that the mother may have had a difficult birth just a few days beforehand, and she will almost certainly be tired.

For the convenience of the clients, it is a great idea to keep in the studio a large stock of newborn sized nappies, breast pads, cotton wool, muslins, sealed brand new dummies, wet wipes for sensitive skin, and anti-bacterial hand gel. (It is quite usual for a newborn to pee and poop all over you, and over your props and backdrops. The parents should be pre-warned about this and reassured that it is normal and to be expected. That way, the parents will not feel embarrassed.) Always take the session at the babys pace. Take your cues from the baby and watch for signs of hunger and ensure breaks are taken for the baby to feed.

WHY DO BABIES CRY?

Babies cry because it is their only means of communicating to us that they are not happy. However, when a baby cries you need to be able to understand why. A baby may be fussy during a session for a variety of reasons; for example, he may be hungry, he may be too hot or too cold, or he may simply want a cuddle. It is important for the photographer to try to ascertain the cause of the babys cry and this is something that will come with experience. Remember that it is your job as a newborn photographer to maintain a calm environment and as such the photographer should be familiar with how to calm a crying baby by learning soothing techniques. Deal with a crying baby quickly by picking him up; never leave a baby to cry.

Common reasons babies for babies to cry are as follows: Overtired Hungry Thirsty Tummy ache or wind pain They need to burp or pass wind They are too hot or too cold The photographer is moving the baby around too much and not allowing the baby to settle, meaning that the baby is over-stimulated.

Colic and tummy ache A newborn with tummy pain may appear to be hungry: he may want to feed in an attempt to feel better. This will have a temporary effect but extra feeding could add to tummy pain. If there is tummy pain (usually characterized by a loud screech or cry and drawing the legs up to the tummy) then the baby may have wind. With the parents permission, the photographer should lay the baby down across their knee and gently rub his back. The photographer should always seek the parents permission and if in doubt hand the baby back to the parents.

If the photographer is not confident in assisting the baby to bring up wind, then the baby should be handed back to the parents so that the parents can wind their baby.

Colic is a condition that may show up when a baby is two to three weeks old. A baby with colic will generally arch his back. He also is likely to draw his legs up to his tummy. A baby is considered to have colic if he cries for more than three hours at a time. Generally colic tends to be worse in the evenings.

Room temperature As mentioned earlier, the photographer should ensure the studio is heated to around 80 degrees Fahrenheit. It is important for the photographer to constantly assess the newborns temperature. The baby will be undressed and therefore will lose body heat quickly, not only because they are not wearing any clothes, but also because they do not have any stored fat. Just as the baby should not get cold, it also should not become too warm. It is good practice to ensure your studio is equipped with a room thermometer to enable you to check the temperature throughout the session. The temperature should remain consistent at all times. A heater should also be kept by the baby but not too near the photographer should ensure that the baby is not caught by the heat, which could burn and/or overheat the baby.

When a baby becomes too hot they begin to sweat and will burn more calories. The baby will become uncomfortable and may feel hot to touch. If this happens then you should move the baby away from the heat source or open a window to cool the room to the correct temperature.

When a baby becomes too cold, their skin can turn blue or purple and may become blotchy. This is something to avoid at all costs; immediately wrap the baby in a blanket and cuddle them until they have returned to normal temperature.

When monitoring a babys body temperature watch out for the following: Cold hands Cold feet Purple or redness Blotchy skin Pale skin Sweating These are all indications of a change in the babys temperature and immediate action should be taken.

SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS Props The photographer should never leave a baby unattended in a prop, on the beanbag or with a young sibling. The photographer should be present at all times during the session.

When using props such as baskets, the photographer should ensure that they always have a helper or a parent next to the baby. If the helper or parent is in view when you take the image you can edit them out in post-production.

It is vital that a hand or a finger is used to support the newborn when photographing in a prop. Newborns cannot support themselves and risks should never be taken just to get the shot.

SETTLING A CRYING BABY When dealing with a baby who will not settle the following may be offered: Water Remember that babies are often thirsty rather than hungry. A breastfed baby may be handed to the mother for a feed and a bottle-fed baby may be offered cooled boiled water or milk by the parent.

Milk If baby appears hungry (he may root for food), then he should be handed back to the parent for a feed. If the baby is bottle-fed then the photographer may wish to feed the baby, to avoid too much passing back and forth. The photographer should always ask the mother if they may feed the baby.

Dummy or pacifier It is good practice to ask the parents to bring a pacifier or dummy with them to the session. If the baby takes a pacifier or dummy then offer this (ensuring it has first been sterilized). The photographer should be aware that many parents do not like using dummies, and the parent should be asked in advance of the session whether the baby takes a dummy.

Sucking Some babies love to suck for comfort. If the baby does not take a dummy and is not hungry but wishes to suck for comfort then some parents are happy to introduce their clean small finger for the baby to suck on.

Shushing A loud shushing noise may also work wonders. The photographer can shush into the babys ear or alternatively there are a variety of apps available on Android or IOS for this purpose. Shushing mimics the noise heard in the womb and will reassure and calm the baby in most cases.

White noise A variety of apps are available to provide white noise  these generally have recordings of rain, waterfalls, waves on the beach and so on. Any machine such as a heater with a constant running noise will have the same effect. I always have the white noise on at a relatively high volume to mask the sound of the camera shutter.

Check baby is dry If the baby has had an accident then he should be cleaned and dried. Some photographers prefer to pass the baby back to the parents for this job, but I prefer to clean the baby myself, so that there is minimal passing of the baby back and forth. If you decide to clean baby yourself then you should check with the parents if they are happy for you to use sensitive wet wipes or if they would prefer cotton wool and water.

Rocking Rocking a baby back and forth can have a calming effect on the baby. A good technique can be to stand with your feet apart and swivel back and forth at the hips. The photographer should ensure that they are holding baby close to them, as this will make the baby feel secure. Rocking while shushing can have a soporific effect. Wrapping in a blanket while rocking is also a good technique.

Wrap/swaddle baby Wrapping or swaddling baby can have a miraculous effect on calming a fussy baby if all else fails. A fussy or crying baby can suddenly become remarkably calm when wrapped. If the baby is already wrapped then the photographer should ensure that the wrap is not too tight and that the baby is not too hot. If the baby cannot be comforted or settled at all then the photographer should suggest to the parents that a rescheduled session may be in order. It is much better for the photographer to call the session to a halt, rather than to persist with a session with a crying baby  this does nobody any good as both parents and baby will be distressed. The parents would far rather return with a calm baby. The parents should be reassured that this sometimes happens so they do not feel their time has been wasted.

Fig. 32 Always support baby when using a prop. Never, ever, leave a baby unattended.

Newborns should never be placed inside any prop that could fall or break. When using baskets the photographer should ensure that the basket has a weight at the very bottom of it, and that the basket is supported by a helper or a parent.

Never stand on a stool, a step ladder or anything else above the newborn, as you could fall on top of the baby. The risk really isnt worth taking. The photographer should ensure that they have their camera strap around their neck when photographing above the baby.

Glass, china or other breakable and potentially dangerous props should never be used. Never wrap babies in fairy lights.

Never ever place the newborn into a sling or any other hanging device unsupported by a parent or helper. These images are created as composites (several images which are then merged together in Photoshop) where the baby is fully supported at all times.

Jewellery Remove rings, as they might may scratch baby; a wedding ring is fine but other rings should be removed. The same applies to necklaces and bracelets.

Nails Always keep your nails short and smoothly filed smoothly. Nails should be free from varnish so that you can ensure they are clean underneath, and long nails that may scratch a baby are an absolute no-no.

Safe posing The photographer should never force the newborn into any pose. It goes without saying that newborn babies are delicate and should be treated as such. There may be times when a parent may ask you to create a certain pose they may have seen online, but it is important that you, as the photographer, always control the session. Do not be afraid to explain to the parents that a pose is either unsafe, or that you do not have experience in carrying out that particular pose. This is always better than to risk the health of a newborn baby. Never attempt an advanced pose until you have been taught by a newborn photography trainer how to do it; learn how to carry out the basic poses first.

Never leave the baby unattended for any reason whatsoever. If the photographer needs to adjust the lighting, then have a spotter or a parent come and sit right next to the baby to watch over her.

When carrying out poses in props, the photographer should ensure that a spotter or the parent is right next to the prop when the baby is in it. Always remember that the safety of the newborn is absolutely paramount  this point cannot be overstated.

Always insist that a parent is present during the entire session. Unfortunately we live in a litigious society with a blame and claim culture, so it is not a bad idea to have CCTV installed in your studio.

If a baby shows any sign of discomfort whatsoever, either by crying out, wriggling or waking when you are trying to pose them, then you should move onto the next pose.

It is vital that a newborn remains comfortable and calm throughout the session and it is your job as the photographer to ensure that is the case. The more comfortable you make the baby, the more content the baby will be and the more relaxed the parents will be. Newborns who are moved continually will become unsettled. The newborn photographer should always remember that every single baby is different and not every baby will go into every pose: some newborn babies dont like being on their tummies; some dont like being on their back; some babies prefer to be swaddled and wrapped. Always use small and gentle movements when repositioning a newborn baby, watching carefully to see how well the baby is tolerating the pose.

Circulatory system It is very important that the photographer monitors the babys circulation throughout the session when attempting poses where the babys limbs are curled under them. If you notice the babys hands or feet changing to a dark red or purple, then the baby must be repositioned to avoid this. The same applies when wrapping or swaddling a baby  wrap tightly enough but not too tightly, particularly around the neck area, as tight wrapping can restrict airflow into a babys lungs. It is good practice to ensure you can run a finger around the inside of the wrap by the neck and throat. The airways need to remain clear.

Newborn immune system During the last three months of pregnancy the unborn baby receives antibodies from the mother through the placenta (known as passive immunity). However, immunity in newborn babies is only temporary and starts to decrease after the first few weeks or months. Breast milk contains antibodies that help the newborns immune system.

Even though the newborn baby will have some immunity from its mother, the photographer should be sure that they are well and not infectious. Flu in particular can be very dangerous if caught by a newborn baby.

Aim to speak with the parent the day before the scheduled session to check that the baby is well. If the baby is at all unwell, including a cold, then it is best to reschedule.

It is good practice to keep anti-bacterial hand gel with you and it is reassuring for the parents to see you use it frequently. The photographer should always sanitize their hands prior to handling the newborn and particularly after cleaning up any accidents.

COMPOSITE IMAGERY Many parents do not realize that certain images created by newborn photographers are created by way of composite images. That is to say that baby is supported and then parental hands are removed in post-production. The froggy pose is a typical example of this. (I do not carry out the froggy pose as I do not consider it to be safe, even when carried out as a composite image, and for that reason that pose will not be taught within this book.) SLEEP PATTERNS As a newborn photographer it will be helpful to familiarize yourself with the sleep patterns of a newborn baby. The average newborn sleeps most of the day, waking only for a feed every few hours, and most newborns will confuse their days and nights because they do not yet have a sleep routine. As a guide, newborns will sleep for around 8 to 9 hours during the day, waking for a feed when hungry. On average a newborn will wake around every three hours for a feed, but this depends to some extent on whether she is satisfied after each feed.

Newborns and babies have varying stages of sleep, and how calm and still they are depends on the stage of sleep they are in. Just as with adults, there are two types of sleep: rapid eye movement (REM) and non-rapid eye movement.

REM sleep is a very light sleep and is when dreams happen. The eyes move quickly back and forth. Non-REM has four stages: The baby becomes drowsy, the eyes droop and the baby may open and close their eyes.

The baby enters light sleep, and may move and startle with sounds.

The baby enters deep sleep.

The baby enters very deep sleep.

During stages 3 and 4 above, the baby will be quiet and will not generally move. This is the best stage at which the photographer should be carrying out their posing. It is a matter for you as the photographer whether you wish to start with awake shots of the baby and then wait for him to fall asleep or whether you wish to get the baby into a deep sleep to begin with and finish off with awake shots.

When photographing awake newborn babies, remember that they are unable to focus at a distance of more than 2030cm away and that a newborn babys eyes may wander as she cant fix her focus on a subject. Patience is needed when photographing awake newborns  but patience is rewarded: when you manage to nail an awake shot the parents will always buy it.

Settling the baby to sleep Settling a newborn to sleep is one of the main jobs of a newborn photographer. It should not be left to the parents to settle their baby to sleep. The reason behind this is that if the mother settles the baby to sleep the baby will smell her milk. Moreover, as the photographer you should take control of the session from the very beginning. For that reason I usually take the baby out of the car seat on arrival (with the parents permission) and if the baby is asleep will proceed to undress the baby while sitting on the floor with baby in my arms. This stage should be taken very slowly indeed. If the baby moves, stop what you are doing. Many photographers let the parents undress their baby; what generally happens here is that the parents pull out a cold changing mat, put baby on it, undress the baby and baby wakes up. It is far better for the photographer to undress the baby right from the outset. Parents are usually very happy for you to take control of the session. Always explain everything you are doing to the parents so that they know your baby is in safe hands.

There are various ways in which the photographer can settle a baby to sleep. Having white noise loud and present in the studio is a good tip. There are various newborn baby toys that also make similar sounds. The photographer can rock the baby firmly (but not too vigorously), holding the baby close to her. Rocking firmly combined with a loud shushing noise works well. Always look at the baby for cues, however: remember that if a baby is hungry or thirsty, they will not sleep no matter how much you rock them.

If rocking does not elicit sleep, then wrapping a baby can be very effective. Newborn babies usually love to be swaddled or wrapped up as it makes them feel warm, cosy and secure  this is because they are used to being in a confined space when they were in the womb. The newborn baby should be wrapped firmly but not too tightly (for more on wrapping techniques see Chapter 6).

Growth spurt/cluster feeding Cluster feeding (when a baby feeds at short intervals) usually occurs when the newborn baby is going through a growth spurt. Common periods of time for growth spurts within the newborn period are between days 7 to 10 and between 2 to 3 weeks, but these times are not set in stone. When the newborn baby is going through a growth spurt he will appear very hungry and may want to be permanently attached to the mothers breast or require more formula than usual. Unfortunately we cant always predict when this will happen as all babies do things differently. It is a good idea to contact the parent the day before the session to see if baby is feeding more than usual. If that is the case then it would be sensible for the photographer to reschedule the session for a few days time.

When a baby is cluster feeding it is unlikely that the photographer will be able to settle the newborn sufficiently to enable images to be taken. There is little point spending three hours on a session that will result in little imagery.

Interaction It can be a good idea to ask the parents to interact with the newborn baby for a very short while before arriving at your studio as this will help the baby sleep later while he is with you. I would ask this of parents of babies who are over ten days old.

Newborn reflexes Newborn babies are born with several reflexes known as primitive reflexes. These are a newborns in-built survival skills and they disappear when the baby is a few months old. The two main reflexes for which a newborn photographer should be familiar with are the startle reflex and the rooting reflex.

Startle reflex (also known as Moro reflex) Many newborns will startle (throw their arms and legs out, and open up their fists) for no apparent reason, but this usually happens in response to the sensation of falling, a loud noise, bright lights or a sudden movement. This startle reflex only lasts a few seconds but is enough to wake a baby.

Rooting reflex The rooting reflex is a normal response in newborn babies and occurs when the cheek is stroked along the side of the mouth. The newborn will automatically turn his head and open his mouth towards the touched side and will hunt for something to suck. Whereas this can indicate hunger, it isnt always a sign that the baby is hungry. If the baby is willing to take a dummy or pacifier, then it is a good idea to try this first, with the parents consent. The mothers clean finger could be used if the parents do not like dummies. The sucking reflex is triggered when a dummy/pacifier or finger, or the mothers nipple, is inserted into the newborns mouth. If this does not pacify the baby then the baby should be given back to the parent to feed.

It should be noted that babies often want to suck not only when they are hungry, but also for comfort or pleasure. It should also be remembered that a baby may not be hungry, but thirsty.

BIRTHWEIGHT A newborns birthweight varies widely from low birthweight (5lbs or under) to heavier birthweights. It is generally not advisable to carry out a newborn session until the newborn baby has reached at least 5lbs in weight since she may be more fragile; this is especially true for premature babies. Heavier babies often require more calories, however, and may feed more often during a session.

SPECIAL CARE Babies with special needs There will be occasions when as a newborn photographer you will be privileged to be asked to photograph a baby who has special needs. The photographer should always carry out research into the needs of the baby and have a pre-session consultation with the parents to ascertain any particular needs. A baby with Down Syndrome, for example, will have low muscle tone and may be floppier than other babies; therefore only simple poses should be carried out. The photographer should bear in mind that sometimes a diagnosis of Down Syndrome may have come as a huge shock to the parents if this was not picked up in pre-natal testing. The photographer should take special care to ensure that the parents are comfortable and to reassure them that their baby is in safe hands. Other than the photographer only being able to carry out the simpler poses, and extra reassurance for the parents, the photographer should treat the parents and the session as a normal newborn session.

Premature babies A newborn is considered premature if born before the 37th week of pregnancy. Premature babies have a higher risk of complications, infection and illness than full-term babies, and they have less body fat. When a premature baby is in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) they are kept warm and the same should apply during a newborn photography session.

Although newborn babies are best photographed at three weeks or under, this does not apply to premature babies; when scheduling a session with a premature baby, wait until the baby has at least reached its forty-week due date.

Premature babies require special care and the photographer should always enquire whether there were any birth complications or any conditions from which the newborn may be suffering. Take extra care when photographing a premature baby. Some babies have low muscle tone and therefore are unable to achieve certain poses such as a chin on hands pose (also known as the froggy pose).

Unwell babies and babies with life-limiting illnesses On occasion, newborn photographers are called upon to take images of unwell babies and babies with life-limiting illnesses. Whether as the photographer you decide to charge for your services and resulting images is a matter for you. There are two charitable organizations set up which offer photography services and imagery free of charge to the parents of stillborn babies, babies who have died shortly after birth or babies with life-limiting illnesses. These are Now I Lay Me Down To Sleep (NILMDTS) www.nilmdts.com, and Remember My Baby www.remembermybaby.co.uk. Volunteering for either or both of these organizations is a worthwhile thing to do, but must not be undertaken lightly. You will come across very upsetting situations and will need to remain highly professional; that said, it is a wonderful gift to be able to give grieving parents.

A session with a stillborn baby will most likely take place at the hospital where the baby was born. You will be photographing tragic circumstances. That said, the parents will forever treasure imagery which is given to them of their precious baby.

Remember that your job is as a commissioned newborn photographer and therefore medical advice should not be given under any circumstances. If you are concerned about a babys appearance then this should be flagged with the mother and the mother can seek appropriate medical advice.

HEALTH AND SAFETY CHECK Before carrying out any session, whether shooting in the studio or on location, the photographer should carry out a health and safety check (see the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974). Look out for trip hazards such as trailing leads, props and other items which may cause a hazard to the client. Floors should be dried if recently washed. The light stands should not be so high that they might tip over; invest in heavyweight stands for lights to avoid this hazard, and align the single leg of the lighting stand tripod with the flash head to prevent the stand from tipping over. Flash units should be covered with soft boxes or umbrellas to prevent burns. Props should not be over-stacked on shelving. It is the photographers legal responsibility to ensure that all clients and visitors to their studio are safe.

Note that cameras can carry all sorts of bacteria. It is good practice to wipe down the casing of the camera body with sanitizing wipes before a newborn session so that you are not transferring bacteria from the camera onto the baby when you are posing them. Props should be cleaned before a newborn session  there are various safe sanitizers which can be used. Milton sterilizing fluid is well known in the UK as a safe disinfectant around babies.

Chapter 6 Newborn posing Although the usual time for photographing newborn babies is generally between days 4 and 14, this depends on babys birthweight and whether baby was premature. It is often possible to pose babies aged up to four weeks.

As noted earlier, maintaining a calm environment is essential; this should in turn keep the baby and parents calm. Remember that newborns dont come with an instruction manual, and that first-time mothers can become anxious; a newborn photographer will often be more experienced than the parents in handling a newborn.

It is therefore important to explain to the parents everything you are doing during the session. If the baby cries, explain to the parents why you think that might be and suggest a solution. Newborn photographers become well versed over time in recognizing different cries and their meaning (for example, an over-tired baby will have a crotchety, cross cry). Although it is not a good idea for the photographer to be passing the newborn backwards and forward to the parents, if the mother wants or needs to cuddle her baby then it goes without saying that the baby should immediately be passed back. Reassuring the parents goes a long way to maintaining a calm environment and further develops the relationship of trust.

NEWBORN PHOTOGRAPHY NECESSITIES When starting up a newborn photography business there are certain items you will need to purchase. Always buy the best you can afford.

A sturdy backdrop stand onto which you can clamp your blankets or a frame  a beanbag frame can be made for around 25 or less using parts readily available from hardware stores or plumb centres.

A professional large newborn photography posing beanbag (available from www.babypropshop.co.uk).

An SLR camera and 50mm or 2470 lens, and a backup camera and lens.

If shooting artificial light, a lighting stand, light and soft box or umbrella. The Elinchrom RX One D Lite is ideal (www.theflashcentre.com).

A variety of blankets measuring 2 metres in order to create a backdrop for your beanbag.

Clamps to clamp the backdrop to your beanbag frame.

A variety of wraps, hats and headbands.

A variety of different shaped small vinyl bean-filled pillows to assist with posing and support.

Props such as a bowl and a crate.

Pee pads to layer under the blankets in case baby has an accident.

BEANBAG, POSING PILLOWS, BLANKETS AND OUTFITS The beanbag should be firmly stuffed; this will really help with posing. Beanbag beans settle over time so make sure that the beanbag is regularly topped up.

Layer three to five blankets and place a pee pad in between each to protect the blanket underneath if the baby pees. The blankets should be stretched as firmly as possible and clipped to a frame. It is good practice to steam the blankets when on the beanbag to get rid of any creases.

It is important that when you pose a newborn you can see all the features and particularly the babys face. With that in mind it is a good idea to use a small pillow to put under the blankets that are on top of the beanbag. This will help support the babys head. There are a variety of smaller stuffed beanbags available, which will assist in supporting the newborn baby (see www.babypropshop.co.uk).

Make sure that all the outfits, wraps and blankets you wish to use are to hand. Pre-planning the session and the colours you wish to use will help, as you can then ensure that you have the necessary hats and outfits in the right colours. This saves precious time.

LIGHTING THE NEWBORN BABY Artificial lighting for newborn photography is provided either through continuous lighting (such as LED continuous light) or strobe (flash). Natural light is provided by a window when shooting indoors. Whether you are using natural light or artificial light, always ensure that the baby is being lit from the head downwards. If you are using artificial light then set up your lighting in advance of the session.

Natural light Some photographers prefer to use natural light when photographing newborn babies because they are concerned about the effect of the flash on the newborn baby. There is no evidence to suggest that flash is harmful to a newborn babys eyes, and in any event, the flash should not be pointing straight at the baby. In the UK we are not blessed with particularly bright days except in the middle of summer. On darker winter days it will be necessary to shoot using flash or other artificial light.

When photographing with natural light, the photographer should set up next to a window with the beanbag approximately 23 feet away from it. The window should be to the side of the beanbag. The babys head should be at the window end so that the light is falling down the babys face. It is possible to feather natural light by just having the front of the beanbag in line with the natural light coming through the window.

When using natural light on a sunny day the photographer will need to make sure that the sunlight does not fall directly on the baby or the beanbag.

Artificial light Choosing the right equipment The larger the light source the softer the light. However, if you are a mobile photographer, having a large softbox may present problems when there is limited space in a clients home. A fantastic option is the Elinchrom D-Lite RX One together with the 100cm Rotalux softbox (available from www.theflashcentre.com). This is a perfect lighting set-up for mobile newborn photographers because it is compact and not too large to assemble in clients homes. The RX One delivers approximately twice the power of speed lights and the beauty of it is that it can be set to produce a low light output  this means the photographer is able to shoot wide open should they wish to do so (at /2.8 or wider). It also has a locking handle, enabling the photographer to lock the flash head to the angle they wish. Using this light with the Skyport flash trigger, which sits on the top of the hot shoe of your camera, you can adjust the power of the lights from where you are, meaning that you do not have to get up and leave the baby in order to adjust the flash output (essential for newborn safety). The softbox provides a beautifully soft light as it has a double diffusion panel. For around 150 for the head alone, these lights are exceptionally good quality, sturdy, easy to manoeuvre and produce a beautiful quality of light.

UPLIGHTING Uplighting, when the subject is lit from below (often referred to as horror lighting), is to be avoided. Ensure that the baby is lit from the top of the head downwards to avoid this situation. Remember light should fall down the babys face, not up.

The softbox is very easy to take up and take down as it folds like an umbrella head. These Elinchrom lights are available from The Flash Centre (www.theflashcentre.com).

If you are a photographer based in your own studio then you may have the space for a larger head or larger softbox. Even if this is the case, the RX One is definitely a light worth having in your studio for newborn photography alone. The RX range is available in RX One (100w) RX Two (200w) RX Three (300w), and RX Four (400w). The higher wattage output of the RX Three and RX Four would be needed if you intend to photograph family groups and moving children within the studio, as the RX One or Two would not be powerful enough.

Setting up your artificial light When setting up the light, align the far edge of the light with the edge of the beanbag on which the baby will be lying. The light should be the same side as the babys head. The aim is to light the baby with the very edge of your soft box, resulting in feathered light. Remember, the nearer the light, the softer the light. Trigger the light (using the Skyport flash trigger as described above) and ensure that it is working before you put the baby down.

Fig. 33 This image was shot using natural light, with the window 2 feet to the left of the beanbag on which baby is lying.

ISO 1000 1/60 /2.8 Fig. 34 Just taking the wrap off the baby creates a different look to the image.

ISO 1000 1/60 /2.8 Fig. 35 Here the light is set up with the edge of the light at the edge of the beanbag.

THE BEANBAG POSES There are five main beanbag poses: wrapped side pose, unwrapped side pose, bottom up pose, chin up pose and taco pose. Newborn photographers differ as to which pose they will start with first. If you have an unsettled baby then it can be a good idea to start with a wrapped pose, as this will help calm the baby; once wrapped the baby will feel secure.

How to begin Remember that as the photographer it is up to you to control the session, and, as previously stated, it should be you who takes the baby from the car seat (having first asked the parents permission). Baby in all likelihood will still be asleep. Cuddle the baby for a good five to ten minutes until you are sure the baby is properly asleep and then, with baby still in your arms (with you sitting on the floor at this point), gently undress the baby. If baby wriggles, stop what you are doing and wait until baby settles. It is very important not to rush this step. Once you have baby undressed, keep the nappy on and continue to cuddle the baby.

You will soon know when baby is relaxed and fully asleep as his head will feel heavy in your arms and his arm will most likely dangle. His fists will not be clenched and he will have a relaxed expression. A trick is to trigger the flash if you are shooting with artificial light. If the baby grimaces then he is not in a deep enough sleep. When you are able to trigger the flash and baby doesnt respond in any way, then you know that you are ready to start. If you are shooting natural light then you can gently blow on the newborns temple and see if that elicits a response. If there is no response then the baby is ready. When you are at this stage, and only then, do you put the baby down on the beanbag. Many newborn photographers rush this stage. It is absolutely vital that you slow everything down and do not panic.

Always transition the baby from one pose to another as smoothly as you possibly can. Many photographers find that the baby wakes up when they are moving them to another pose. This happens either because the baby is not in a deep enough sleep, or because the photographer is moving the baby too much or is hurrying. Remember to slow everything down and take the session at the babys pace. If you find that the baby wakes up or cries when you are starting to transition the baby into another pose then stop what you are doing and put your hands on the baby, and sssh loudly in the babys ear. If baby is crying then pick him up and rock and sush him until he resettles. Watch out for baby cues, such as hunger. If the baby takes a dummy or pacifier then with the parents permission you can introduce this. The photographer should only attempt to repose the baby once the baby has settled back into a deep sleep. Following the transitions below will assist you not only in knowing what to do next, but will also help you with the flow of the entire session.

Wrapped side pose I always start with the baby lying on his side. This is because I find that babies tend to feel comfortable in this position. With a wrap already in position, gently place the baby on the beanbag on his side, with a third of the fabric in front of the baby. Be sure to keep your hands on the baby so that he does not startle. Then, when baby is relaxed, gently position his hands so that they are cupping his chin, ensuring that his hands are not in fists before you do this. Once you have achieved that you then take one hand away from the baby and bring the forward part of the wrap around the baby and tuck it underneath his back. Then bring the back part of the wrap over to the front of the baby. Very gently lift the baby a couple of millimetres and pass the wrap underneath. Continue with this until baby is comfortably wrapped. You can choose whether or not to wrap the feet.

Fig. 36 The baby is wrapped firmly but not too tightly to provide comfort. Note how the fingers can be seen and are not clenched.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 In Figure 36 you can see care has been taken to ensure that the wrap is tidy, that the baby has a relaxed expression on her face, and that her little fingers can be seen. Some babies will claw at their faces. If you see that happening, wait until baby relaxes and then with your little finger very carefully unclench babys fingers from their face until their hand is cupping their chin. This pose takes time but it is definitely worth persevering.

Fig. 37 Always remember to take a close-up image.

ISO 100, /4 1/160 Fig. 38 A shot from above provides an interesting angle.

ISO 100 1/160 /2.8 Fig. 39 Here the babys hands were adjusted so that one hand is on top of the other.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 The photographer should photograph a full-length shot, a close-up shot, and a shot from the top. It is also a great idea while baby is wrapped to also capture any macro shots of the eyelashes, nose, ears, mouth and feet.

Fig. 40 In this side lying wrapped pose note how the feet are further back from the face. Shooting at 2.8 allows the focus on the babys face.

ISO 100 1/160 /2.8 Fig. 41 The wrap is very carefully removed from the baby while baby is still lying in position. The baby is relaxed and comfortable.

ISO 100 1/160 /2.8 Unwrapped side pose This image is the same as the wrapped image, the difference being that the newborn has been carefully unwrapped while still lying on her side. Once unwrapped, gently bend the babys knees and angle the baby so that the face is nearer the camera and the body further away. This keeps the focus on the babys face. If the babys feet are in front of the face then they will appear far larger than they really are and the entire photograph will look strange. The photographer will need to be quick when capturing this shot as some babies will move out of it. It is important to vary each shot as much as you can and this can be achieved not only by shooting at different angles, but also by adding headbands, hats and fabric wraps. Textures such as mohair look fantastic against the soft, smooth skin of a newborn baby. When adding hats or headbands the photographer should take care to ensure that there arent any stray hairs on the babys face as this is a time-consuming matter to correct in post-production.

Variation of side pose By moving the top hand away from the chin and onto the babys hip, this creates a different and very pleasing image. The photographer should move the babys hand very carefully and gently so as not to wake the baby.

Bottom-up pose Once the side lying poses have been carried out, the photographer can very carefully position the baby into the bottom-up pose. The photographer should very gently place one hand on the babys bottom and one hand on the shoulders and gently roll baby onto the tummy. Most babies will stay asleep during this transition. Always ensure that the arm which is furthest away (the babys inside arm) is not trapped underneath the baby or this will cause a circulation problem. Ensure that the outside hand is underneath the babys cheek and that the babys head is well supported by the pillow under the blankets.

This pose is all about connection  therefore the babys knees should be up under the tummy, touching the elbow. There should not be a space between the babys chin and shoulder. When baby is in this position the final adjustment is to cross his feet under his bottom. If you wish for the bottom to be higher than the head then just add a small pillow underneath the blanket under the babys knees. Once you have done this, very gently bring the bottom towards you in a small c shape - this gives you those adorable wrinkles. The photographer should always be paying close attention to the comfort of the baby  if baby shows any sign of being uncomfortable then the pose should be adjusted.

Fig. 42 A simple camera tilt provides a different look to the image.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 43 Draping a wrap can add interest to the pose.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 44 An adjustment of the hands makes for another beautiful shot.

ISO 100 1/160 /2.8 Fig. 45 In this shot a simple bonnet was added, changing the image again. The image was shot further back to show how small baby is.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Once you have captured this shot, you can become creative, shooting from different angles and adding hats. Again tilting your camera will give a different dimension to the shot.

The photographer should again take a variety of shots  shooting from above produces yet another an adorable shot.

Fig. 46 A close-up image records babys beautiful features. The texture of the bonnet against the babys skin provides interest.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 47 In this shot the elbow touches the knee, which in turn produces lovely baby wrinkles.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 48 A camera tilt provides a different looking shot.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 49 Adding a beautiful knit provides interest.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 50 Adding a pair of trousers looks super cute on this little boy.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 It should be noted that in all of the images in this section the babies were in exactly the same poses. This demonstrates how changing your shooting angle, and adding knitwear and wraps, can completely change the look of an image. This is particularly helpful for fussy babies who do not like to be moved. The photographer should be able to create at least five different-looking shots without moving the baby.

Chin-up pose The chin-up pose is an advanced pose and should not be attempted until the photographer is confident in carrying out the bottom-up pose and the side lying pose. The photographer should undertake newborn photography training before attempting this pose to ensure she understands the safety element involved and exactly how to achieve the pose; it should be carried out very gently and carefully, so that the baby remains comfortable. Ensure that a parent or helper is next to the baby when making this transition.

From the bottom-up pose, the photographer should gently bring both elbows forward and place one hand on top of the other so that the hands are underneath the babys chin. Take this step very slowly. If the baby moves then ssssh in his ear and wait until he is settled and then try again. Gently easing the babys arms into position allows the baby to relax into that position. The entire time the photographer should be watching out for the newborns cues: if the baby becomes unhappy at any stage then it is best to abandon that pose and move onto another one. Not all babies will do every pose and this should be remembered at every session.

Fig. 51 Always remember to shoot different angles.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 52 Partially covering the baby with a wrap makes for an artistic shot.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 53 In this image only the babys bottom half is wrapped, making a cocoon-like image, as if baby is newly hatched.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 54 A close-up landscape shot from above with the focus on the babys eye shows an angle of the baby that the parents will love.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 55 Adding a wrap and a hat, and placing the baby into the corner of the image differentiates the shot from the rest. The inclusion of negative space shows how vulnerable and tiny a newborn baby is.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 56 Adding a tutu is an adorable touch for a baby girl.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 57 Baby is comfortable and relaxed. Note how the baby is not frowning and how her hands are relaxed. The mothers hand supporting the baby has been airbrushed out in post-production.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 58 Adding fabric adds another dimension. In this image, the simple addition of a pink cheesecloth has transformed the image.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 59 Shooting close into the dark side of the face creates depth and highlights the babys beautiful features.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Once you have the babys chin on his hands, then very gently pick the baby up a couple of millimetres from the blanket and position him so that he is facing the camera. The babys head should be supported by an assistant or a parent for this shot.

Baby in bucket pose Once you have taken the chin-up pose, if you have thought ahead and have a prepared bucket or wooden tub ready, then you can very carefully transition the baby over to the bucket in order to carry out that shot too. Always ensure that there is a weight in the bottom of the bucket and that the parents or an assistant are right beside the baby while this shot is being carried out. The assistant or parent must support the side of the babys head with their finger  this can easily be removed in post-production. Again, this is an advanced pose and should not be attempted until the photographer has mastered the more simple poses and undertaken newborn photography training.

Fig. 60 Note how the babys head is supported by the mother. The parent should not remove their hand at any point Fig. 61 The mothers hand supporting the baby has been removed in post-production. Further editing has also been carried out on the image.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 In Figure 61 the bucket has been pre-prepared. It has a weight in the bottom to avoid tipping, and has been padded out inside with comfortable soft blankets. The babys head was supported for safety and the helpers hand was removed in post-production.

Fig. 62 This shows both a close-up and a full shot of baby in a tin bucket, once the helpers hand has been removed in post-production.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 63 Taking a close-up of the same image shows off babys details.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 64 Soft tones work well with the wooden texture of the bucket. The baby was supported at all times.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Taco pose The taco pose should only be attempted when the photographer is confident with the bottom-up and side lying pose, and only after newborn photography training. The baby should be soundly asleep before the photographer attempts this pose. If you have carried out the chin-up pose with baby in a bucket, then carefully remove the baby and bring him back to the beanbag. When you are sure that baby is settled put him down into the tushie-up pose. If baby becomes unsettled then stop what you are doing and resettle him. Once baby is in the tushie-up pose, uncross the back feet and very gently bring the babys legs forwards so that the foot is placed up by the babys elbow. Not all babies will go into this pose and it should never be forced. If a baby niggles when you attempt this, move on to a different pose.

Fig. 65 This taco pose was shot with negative space to the babys left.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 66 The photographer can vary this pose by adding a wrap and a hat.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 67 Remember to play with angles when shooting: a slight tilt and coming in closer to the baby provides a different image.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Close-up macro shots Photographing baby details (or any details such as flowers) is known as macro photography. The photographer should aim to capture a variety of close-up macro shots of the babys features at every session. The mouth, ears, eyelashes (if baby has them), fingers and feet should all be captured. Not only do these make adorable photographs for the parents to remember the tiny details of their newborn, but they also make great album fillers.

Fig. 68 A shot of baby feet is a must  is there anything sweeter?

ISO 125 1/160 /3.5 Fig. 69 This photograph was taken with the emphasis on the babys beautiful mouth.

ISO 100 1/160 /2.8 Fig. 70 In this image the baby opened her eyes allowing for a gorgeous shot to be captured.

ISO 100 1/160 /2.8 The Canon 2470 2.8 has macro capabilities but using a dedicated macro lens such as the 100mm 2.8 will allow you to focus within centimetres of babys features. Shooting at 2.8 will create a lovely dreamy backdrop to really show off those features. Photographing close-up will magnify the features.

The best time to carry out the macro shots is when the baby is settled and asleep. That way the baby is still and you will be able to focus properly without baby waving his hands and feet around! It can be a good idea to carry out the macro shots at the very beginning of the session so that you have them in the bag and you dont forget about shooting them.

Figs 71 and 72 Two different angles result in two beautiful shots for the clients gallery.

Posing in props Once you have mastered posing the newborn on the beanbag, you will want to progress and photograph the baby in props. Prop photographs are popular with parents, but the trick is to keep it simple at first. Always try to keep the emphasis on the baby. Overdressing a scene will take attention from the baby so that the eye does not know where to look first when viewing the photograph.

One of the simpler poses to begin with is lying baby on a flokati with a padded bowl underneath it. The baby is simply laid in and the legs are crossed over and held in place. The photographer will find it helpful to have basket stuffers such as cloth nappies nearby to be able to help the baby remain in position. These are simply stuffed under the flokati and into the bowl around the baby. Putting a stuffer underneath the flokati in front of the babys feet will help keep them in position. When lying on his back and supported by stuffers, the baby does not need to be supported by the parents; he will feel cosy and warm. This is the perfect opportunity to shoot a variety of images.

Fig. 73 Baby is supported on scales and the mother has been airbrushed out in post-production.

ISO 160 1/160 /3.2 Fig. 74 In this shot the baby was placed in a padded tin bucket. The babys head was supported by the mother (camera left). She was airbrushed out in post-production.

ISO 160 1/160 /3.2 Fig. 75 In this image the baby was placed in a wooden crate as if she was in a bed. The image is shot from above.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 76 I took this shot when training another newborn photographer. The wooden cart prop belongs to the trainee. The texture of the wood against the softness of the rug works well. Baby was supported.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Props may be used to create a variety of interesting images. Keep a look out in antique shops for interesting props that can be used for newborn photography. The contrasting tones in Figures 7375 make for beautiful shots and the lower key lighting creates atmospheric images.

SAFETY FIRST Remember: always have a helper supporting the baby when using props. Never, ever, leave the baby unattended in a prop at any time.

Fig. 77 Shooting a sequence of an older child with their new sibling can produce beautiful images.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Posing with siblings Always ask the parents in advance whether there are any siblings to be incorporated into the session (I would actively encourage this). Since a newborn session can take three hours or more, it is sensible to advise the parents either to bring the siblings at the beginning or end of the session so that the photographer can photograph the siblings and newborn together at that point, rather than having siblings in the studio for the entire session. Siblings, particularly young ones, will get bored incredibly quickly and this will not help in maintaining a calm environment. The parents expectations should be managed with regard to photographing siblings with their newborn baby. It isnt always possible if a particularly young child does not wish to be photographed. The photographer should explain that they will try their best to create images but that these cannot be guaranteed as it does depend on the older siblings cooperation. Remember that the older child is still getting used to having a younger sibling. An older child should never ever be forced to have their image taken and neither the photographer nor the parents should become irritated or cross with the older sibling if they do not wish to cooperate. I find that asking a very reluctant child once or twice and then leaving the matter can result in the child deciding all by himself that he will cooperate; some children, however, will not wish to be photographed.

A great way in which to pose younger siblings with their newborn sibling is to photograph them from above, with them lying on a flokati or other soft, comfortable rug. The photographer should have the newborn wrapped for this image, as the baby will in all likelihood remain asleep. Once wrapped, the photographer should ask the siblings to lie down on their back looking up at you. You can then place the newborn in the crook of the siblings arm. You can create a great set of images with siblings by asking the older sibling to look up at you, to kiss the baby, look at the baby  these create great sequences which are absolutely perfect to sell as a collection of wall art.

Fig. 78 This little girl is so proud of her new baby sibling. She was very happy to stand behind the baby and smile for the camera. The mother is millimetres away from the baby and has been airbrushed out in post-production.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Another successful method of photographing siblings is to have the newborn on a prop. The baby should be soundly asleep for this shot, and the best pose is the tushie-up pose. For Figure 78, once baby was soundly asleep I gently posed the baby on the posing stool and took the images; I then asked the sibling to come forward and kiss his baby sister, which he duly did. This created a very sweet image which the parents adored. Remember, when posing newborns on a prop, a parent or helper should be next to the baby for safety.

Fig. 79 Baby is gently posed on a posing stool. The older sibling came in to kiss his new baby sister. Mother is camera right and has been airbrushed out in post-production.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 80 A small pee pad was placed under this little babys bottom to protect the little girls dress in case of an accident!

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 In Figure 80 the sibling was old enough to hold the baby in her lap. The mother was camera right for safety and has been airbrushed out in post-production.

Fig. 81 Baby was posed carefully in the tub and then the little girl was brought into the shot.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 82 A close-up shot captures a tender moment.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 Posing with parents In advance of the session the parents should be asked to wear appropriate clothing. Black, white or cream is a good choice. The parents should be advised to wear plain clothes with no patterns or logos which would be a distraction in the photograph.

Fig. 83 A father with his newborn son, shot with one light low key on a dark background.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 There is nothing more special than a portrait of parents with their newborn baby. However, many mothers need coaxing into having their photograph taken. This is because they are usually exhausted, and they feel that they dont look their best. A common comment from mothers is that they have bags under their eyes from tiredness. The photographer should reassure that with clever lighting and shooting angles and the use of airbrushing when appropriate, these can easily be whisked away. Explain to the parents that there is no harm in having their portrait taken and they may regret it if they dont. The likelihood is that they will love the resulting image the photographer creates. Parents almost always purchase shots of themselves with their newborn baby.

Fig. 84 Asking the parents to pose closely together provides a tenderness to the image of this family with their newborn son.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 85 Asking the parents to close their eyes and a close crop provides a different image again.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 MENTAL BLOCK It is not uncommon in the middle of a newborn session for a photographer to suddenly get a mental block and not know which pose or which prop to use next. This is something that will disappear with experience but may well happen during your first few sessions, and is more likely to happen if you have a fussy baby. However, a mental block can be avoided by setting out the props, blankets, hats, headbands and any other accessories you wish to use in advance of the session. It is also a good idea to have a sheet of newborn poses next to you so that you can take a quick look at which pose to do next.

A mental block can also happen if the photographer has a fussy or crying baby. Do not panic; concentrate on calming the baby down by using the techniques set out in Chapter 5. Once the baby is calm the photographer can concentrate again on which pose to attempt.

If a parent really does not wish to have their portrait taken then the photographer can suggest a shot whereby only their hands are present holding the baby.

Figs 86 and 87 Always aim to capture each parent with their new baby.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 88 In this shot, baby is actually lying on a beanbag with the parents hands underneath.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 89 This little newborn settled very well in her daddys hands.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 It should be noted that fussy babies usually settle well when being posed in their parents hands and therefore these are great shots to get if all else fails. In Figure 89, black velvet was draped over the father with his arms outside the material. The baby was posed into the fathers hands and settled well, enabling a beautiful shot to be taken.

How many images?

In todays digital age it is common for clients to expect a huge amount of imagery from their professional photographer. This is because many people have phones and tablets with a large memory and are used to taking photographs at every opportunity.

The fact is, however, that the clients are paying a professional and as such the photographers emphasis should always be on quality rather than quantity of imagery. A very common question asked by clients is, How many pictures will we receive? When you are starting out it is very tempting to give the client every image you have taken in order to please them. However, providing too many images can overwhelm the client and makes it hard for them to choose the images they would like; it also takes away the wow factor from the images that are superb.

The photographer should take pride in their work and show only the very best imagery. Remember that newborn photography is an art form; it is always far better to provide twenty beautiful images than forty mediocre images. Managing the clients expectations is key here, and it can be a good idea to include within your welcome guide a rough idea of how many pictures a client may expect. Always under-promise and over-deliver. It should be explained to the client that the number of images will depend, to some extent, on how well their newborn sleeps during the session, and that not all newborns will carry out all poses. As a guide, the photographer should expect to deliver a minimum of twenty images to the client.

Over-shooting In the early days, it is very common for newborn photographers to spend too long in capturing one particular pose. This results in taking too many shots with not enough variety; when the photographer has the baby in one pose, they may take lots and lots of photographs from different angles and are then scared to move the baby to another position. With practice and experience the photographer will learn to concentrate on three or four different angles per pose and then move onto the next pose. A good tip is to carry out a full length, a three-quarter length, a close-up and a tilted shot for each pose. The photographer should check the histogram and the focus of the image on the back of their camera. Once the photographer has those shots, they should move on to the next pose. Overshooting wastes time and is not necessary. As a newborn photographer you need to work effectively and calmly within the time period that you have. You do not know how long the baby will remain asleep. This is not to say that the shoot should be rushed  it is a fine line between working efficiently and not rushing the session.

Time management A newborn photographer should expect to spend around three hours on a newborn session. It should be remembered that time is money, and therefore if the photographer finds that the baby is not settling at all, and the photographer has exhausted all areas in trying to settle the baby, then it is pointless to spend, say, five or six hours trying to get baby to sleep! (I cap my sessions at three hours.) In that situation, if the baby is calm but not sleeping the photographer can concentrate on awake shots.

When should I offer a reshoot?

If the photographer has a baby who is on a growth spurt or cluster feeding, and it becomes clear that the shoot cannot proceed, then a reshoot should be scheduled within approximately three days. This gives the baby time to get over the cluster feeding. Whether the photographer charges for the reshoot is their decision. It has been suggested that a reshoot fee should not be charged on the basis that it isnt the clients fault that her baby is deciding to cluster feed, and the situation is beyond her control. It can, however, be good practice to email the client the day before to ascertain how baby is feeding  if baby is suddenly feeding a huge amount, then it would be best to postpone the session for a couple of days.

Shooting angles When photographing a newborn baby it is essential to photograph from the correct angle to ensure a flattering photograph. Many newborn photographers find themselves shooting up at the baby, meaning that they are shooting unintentionally up at the babys nose. This is a very unflattering angle at which to photograph a baby, or, in fact, anybody. Shooting up at a baby can make the baby appear larger than he is.

Fig. 90 This is the correct angle from which to photograph, shooting down babys nose.

ISO 160 1/160 /3.5 Fig. 91 This is the incorrect angle from which to photograph  shooting up babys nose.

ISO 160 1/160 /3.5 Once you have the newborn baby posed on the beanbag and you have refined the pose and lighting (remember if you need to leave the baby to adjust your lighting then you must have a helper or parent right next to the baby for safety), you then need to consider your shooting angle. It is a good idea to position yourself so that you are shooting slightly down at the newborn babys nose. In Figures 90 and 91 you can see that shooting up at the baby creates an unflattering image, compared to shooting down the nose.

Wrapping newborns There are various types of wraps available to newborn photographers, ranging from what are known as nubble wraps, which are made of rayon and are incredibly stretchy, to cheesecloth or stretch cotton jersey.

When choosing wrapping material it is advisable to choose a material which has a four-way stretch to it. This will make wrapping the baby easier because it enables you to stretch the fabric in any direction to incorporate all of the baby.

Nubble wraps (also known as rayon wraps) Made of rayon/viscose, and very stretchy with a nice texture. These are available in a wide variety of colours and are available from www.baby-propshop.co.uk.

Cheesecloth wraps These wraps dont generally tend to have a huge amount of stretch but if you use a long enough length of material they are super for wrapping babies into the nest egg wrap. They have a very natural feel and look to them with a lovely texture. Pulling the threads on the edges of the wrap can give a raw feel and more texture to the shot.

Stretch jersey wraps You can easily create your own wraps by purchasing a length of stretch jersey (like T-shirt material). Always ensure the material you are purchasing has a four-way stretch to it.

Mohair and other knitted wraps These wraps look fabulous against a newborn babys skin. The photographer should be aware, however, that newborns do have accidents in wraps and mohair wraps are not machine washable. It can be an arduous and unpleasant task to handwash a heavily soiled mohair wrap! As with other wraps, ensure that you are using a long enough length of material.

Fig. 92 Soft pinks were used in this image, as the parents requested this colour, which complements babys skin tone.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 In addition to using these fabrics to wrap newborns, they may also be used as layers to add texture and interest to a shot. In Figure 92, a cheesecloth was added with a criss-cross blanket to create interest and texture, which works well against babys soft skin. The photographic prop company www.bigcrocodile.co.uk provides beautiful hand-knitted criss-cross blankets, together with matching bonnets.

Fig. 93 In this image, contrasting colours were used. A cheesecloth was layered onto a flokati and then the baby was wrapped in a rayon nubble wrap.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 There is a new product on the market known as Easy Wrap, available from www.cakesmashprops.co.uk. This is a little elasticated sack made out of breathable material, designed to contain babys feet and hands. It has a calming effect on babies. You simply pop your newborn into it and then wrap your wrap as you wish over the Easy Wrap. Always lower the temperature of the room in which you are photographing when using the Easy Wrap, as the baby would be double wrapped and you want to avoid overheating.

Wrapping techniques As previously mentioned, newborns love to be wrapped as it makes them feel secure and cosy. There are various techniques on how to wrap a newborn baby. Newborns may be wrapped either with their hands tucked in, or with hands showing, with feet tucked in or with feet showing and both ways look completely adorable. The trick is to wrap tightly enough so that baby feels secure, but not so tightly that you cause circulation problems. You should be able to run your little finger inside the neckline of the wrap.

Never be afraid to ask the parents to help you with holding the baby still while you wrap, if you feel this is necessary. An awake and fidgety baby can be hard to wrap; simply having a parent hold the baby still can make all the difference.

Newborn photographers often have baby well posed but then fail on the wrapping  always remember that a messy wrap ruins a shot. The photographer should try and wrap as neatly as possible. A good tip is to add another wrap on top of the existing wrap and tuck in if all else fails, which can give the illusion of a neatly wrapped baby.

Fig. 94 The wrap has been placed on the beanbag ready to put the baby on in the side lying pose.

When wrapping on a beanbag a good pose to start with is the side lying wrapped pose. Place the wrap on the beanbag with about a third of it in front of where you will lie the baby and the rest of it hung over the back of the backdrop (as shown in Figure 94).

Fig. 95 The baby has been firmly wrapped. Note that the wrap is neat and tidy.

ISO 160 1/60 /4 When you are completely sure baby is settled, lie baby down on her side, keeping your hands on the baby. Position the hands as you wish (either tucked in or showing) and then bring the front of the wrap to the back of the baby and tuck it underneath her. Then bring the back of the wrap to the front, and tuck it underneath and around baby. Give the wrap a gentle pull to ensure the wrap is tight enough. In Figure 95, the babys hands were gently positioned beneath the chin.

If baby is in a deep sleep then she is unlikely to move. Whether the photographer removes the nappy or diaper when wrapping a newborn is entirely up to them. (I always remove the nappy so that the wrapped baby does not look too clumpy); it should be removed once baby has been partially wrapped so as not to disturb the baby too much. Once the nappy is removed you can then bring the wrap around the baby once more. At this stage you can decide whether to tuck in the feet or whether to leave them showing.

If the photographer wishes to wrap a newborn to go into a prop, such as a basket, then this may be done on the photographers lap. Put the wrap onto your lap with one third of the wrap to the right hand side. Position babys hands down by their side or crossed over their chest. Bring the wrap from the top right of the baby down to their bottom left-hand side and tuck it underneath their bottom. Then bring the wrap from the babys top left-hand side down to their bottom right-hand side and tuck underneath. This will keep the babys arms and hands in place. You can then bring the wrap around the baby again and keep wrapping until you have a little bundle of cuteness. You can alter the pose once you have photographed the baby wrapped, by bringing out a hand or a foot and shooting from different angles.

WRAPPING TIP A tightly wrapped baby is a happy baby, but remember to ensure you can run your finger inside the wrap by the neck. Watch out for babys temperature cues.

Fig. 96 This little newborn was all wrapped up like a peanut. He would have felt warm and secure.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Nest egg wrap The nest egg wrap is created just by using a normal wrap, either rayon or cheesecloth. Place the cheesecloth at an angle and then place the newborn down onto the cheesecloth or wrap. Hold the baby gently into a womb-like pose with the legs crossed upwards and arms crossed over the chest. Starting at the babys shoulder and using just one hand (as your other hand is holding the baby in position) bring the wrap down and around the baby, tucking the wrap underneath the baby as you go. Keep wrapping all the way around the baby until all of the wrap is used up. Remember to wrap tightly and to ensure that the babys private parts are not on show. If you wrap the baby tight enough then the feet will usually be tucked up enough to hide the babys genitals if you have removed the babys nappy.

Fig. 97 Newborn babies can be placed in props once wrapped. In this shot the colour of the wrap and bonnet was chosen to complement the tones of the floor and stuffer.

ISO 200 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 98 You can vary your image by adding a sweet bonnet.

ISO 200 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 99 In this shot the wrap was used just around the babys bottom. Toning colours were used with other materials to create interest.

ISO 160 1/160 /3.5 Fig. 100 Flokati was used as the base for this image; the softness looks beautiful against babys skin. The wrap has been drawn around the baby to create a nest.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 101 This baby was placed into a padded driftwood bowl and then wrapped into the nest egg pose. This image was taken by shooting into the light.

ISO 160 1/160 f4 Once you have the baby in this wrap and baby is snug and comfortable you can start to photograph. As you will be photographing from above, you must ensure the camera strap is attached to the camera and over your head for safety. Photograph a full-length shot while standing over the baby. Then come in closer and take a close-up shot. Remember to move around the baby and photograph from different angles. Photographing into the dark side of the face can create a really beautiful shot.

The nest egg wrapped pose can be carried out either on a flokati, on the beanbag or in a prop such as a basket.

How much time should be spent on each pose?

Whereas a newborn session should never be rushed, it is still important that the time is managed effectively. If you find that you are unable to achieve the pose you want because the baby either does not wish to do it, or because the baby is waking, or for any other reason, then move on to the next pose. It does not make sense to continue trying to get a baby into a pose that she does not want to do. Not only will the photographer end up with a cross baby, but the parents will become anxious  something to be avoided at all costs.

If you have a very fussy baby and you manage to get the baby into one pose, then try to vary the image as much as possible in order to create different images without moving the baby too much. This can be achieved by wraps, hats, headbands, closeup shots and different angles. Whereas you dont want to over-shoot, your aim with a fussy baby is to get as many good images as you possibly can.

Fig. 102 This shot shows a beautifully refined pose with toes and fingers showing.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 103 This image shows the hands perfectly placed under the chin. Time was taken to ensure that babys fingers were uncurled and that baby wasnt clenching at her face.

ISO 160 1/160 /3.5 Refining the pose Taking time to refine your pose will make a huge difference to your imagery. A good tip when starting out is to get the baby into the best pose you can, then take a shot to make sure you have it in the bag. Then refine the pose further until it is perfect and take another shot. Avoid photographing babies who are frowning, as this shows that they are not relaxed  always wait until the frown disappears. Stroking the babys forehead can assist with this.

Photographing babies who are awake There will be times when a newborn baby just will not sleep but may be perfectly calm. This is a great opportunity for the photographer to create some beautiful awake newborn portraits. Photographing awake newborns can take a little longer than usual awake subjects; newborns have not yet learned how to fix their focus and therefore their eyes can wander. Before photographing an awake newborn, wrap her up so that her arms and legs are not flailing everywhere. If the baby does not like to be wrapped then a simple cheesecloth draped over her will look good. You may need to wait a while until the baby focuses on you. Newborns make lots of different expressions which you should set out to capture to create memories for the parents. You can photograph awake babies wrapped up lying on a comfortable rug, or on their back on a prop. Awake babies may also be photographed in their parents arms. If you are creative there should be no reason why you should not be able to shoot enough images of an awake baby for a gallery for the parents.

Figs 104 This little baby woke up, allowing an awake capture.

ISO 160 1/160 /4.5 Photographing sleeping but fidgety babies Some newborn babies are jumpy, even when they are asleep. Usually this means they are not in a very deep sleep and whereas the photographer should take time to try to get the baby into a very deep sleep, some babies just do not want to play the game. In that event, you can still create a gallery of beautiful images. The trick here is to ensure that you move baby as little as possible but photograph from different angles. Even shooting with a tilt to your camera can make an image look completely different even though you havent actually moved the baby. The photographer will need to get creative with wraps and hats, and adding different tones and textures to the baby, even when in the same pose, can create an entirely different set of images.

This is also a good time to get out your macro lens (or use the Canon 2470 which has macro capabilities), and photograph close-ups of the babys features. This can add a good five or so shots to your gallery of images. Some poses, such as the taco and the head on arms shot require newborn babies to be in a very deep sleep and those poses should not be attempted with a jumpy baby. Similarly, awake newborns should not be placed in props. Choose poses where baby is not moved around too much. Wrapping a baby tightly can help calm a sleepy but fidgety baby. Make use of the parents, as babies will almost always settle in their parents arms if held closely. This is a great opportunity to photograph the parents with their newborn.

Photographing babies in props When photographing a baby in a prop, safety should always be the photographers primary concern. Be sure to have the props you wish to use ready set up so that you can transition the baby easily into them. A bowl, a wooden crate and a flokati are all good props to use with newborn babies. Always remember to take a full image, a three-quarter image and close-up image, and to shoot from different angles. This will vary the gallery of images that you will show to the parents.

Fig. 105 When using a prop of this kind the photographer must ensure that the baby is very soundly asleep and that a helper or a parent is right next to the prop. Note how the felt layer adds texture to the image as a whole and creates interest. The baby was supported by the mother, who was later airbrushed out.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 The prop in Figure 105 is a log that has been sanded, waxed and sealed. A soft blanket was placed on the top of the log and a felt layer placed on top of that for comfort. The baby was then placed in the tushie-up pose on the log with the parents hand milimetres away from the babys back. The shot was then taken and the parents hand was placed back on the babys back. The photographer then removed the baby from the log while the baby slept soundly.

Rectangular shallow baskets can make wonderful props for newborn babies and are widely available. They are textured and will create interest. The photographer can also consider theming the newborn session around the time of year in which the baby was born.

Fig. 106 This wooden bowl was handmade for me and is my most requested image by parents. The white cheesecloth provides contrast and interest.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Figs 107 Close-up images should always form part of a parents gallery.

ISO 100 1/160 /4 Fig. 108 This newborn baby was photographed on a flokati. Additional material creates fluid shapes which in turn create interest.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 109 This baby was also wrapped and placed to the far right of the image to create negative space.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 110 An adorable image, with baby wrapped up snugly. Full-length, close-up and angled shots were taken.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Figs 111 and 112 These images below were shot from above. Remember: never stand on anything when photographing a baby, and always have your camera strap around your neck.

ISO 200 1/60 /5.6 Fig. 113 This baby was five weeks old and wide awake. I chose to shoot in close and concentrate on facial expression. Shot using natural light.

ISO 800 1/160 /4 Photographing babies older than fourteen days Although the best time for photographing newborn babies is fourteen days or under, this is not set in stone and as a newborn photographer you should expect to receive enquiries from parents of slightly older babies. They may have missed the time period for the sleepy newborn shots, but these in a lot of occasions may still be possible in babies up to six weeks of age. Managing the parents expectations is key. Explain that they will still receive beautiful images even if their baby doesnt sleep. Never turn away slightly older babies, as beautiful portraits may still be captured of slightly older babies. In all likelihood the baby will be awake, but even at five weeks old, babies can smile, thereby giving you all manner of beautiful images to shoot.

Wide awake older babies will often kick their arms and legs everywhere. Shooting close-up creates beautiful imagery of facial expressions.

Working with twins Posing and photographing twins is an enjoyable part of being a newborn photographer. It is also a great privilege. Newborn twin sessions are hard work and will take longer because there are obviously two babies to settle and pose. It can be useful to have a helper present at a twin newborn photography session so that the photographer is not having to settle both babies at once. It is advisable not to undertake a commission to photograph twins until you are completely confident in posing, lighting and photographing one baby.

Fig. 114 A tender moment between brother and sister.

ISO 160 1/60 /5.6 Fig. 115 These twins were placed on a flokati and photographed together.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 The photographer will need to remain calm throughout the session  working with twins is challenging and you may well find that when one twin wakes the other twin wakes and you find yourself having to calm two babies! It essential to take your time. When photographing twins, be sure to take images of each twin individually as well as together.

It is essential that both twins are fully fed. It is also a good idea to ask the parents which twin is the sleepiest and calmest baby. The photographer should work with the calmest baby first, posing and photographing this twin, then adding the other twin into the shot.

One twin can be posed into the tushie-up pose and then the other baby can be placed so he can lean over his twin. When putting one twin on top of the other it is essential that the lightest baby is the baby on top. Both of the twins faces should be towards the camera so that all the details can be properly seen. Always ensure that a helper or parent is next to the babies when working with twins on the beanbag.

If the babies wake up then the same settling techniques should be employed as if you were settling a single baby. You will not be able to settle both babies at the same time, so you can either ask the parent to help or ensure you have a helper present for the entire session.

When photographing two babies it is very important to make sure that both babies are in focus, taking care to use the correct aperture. If the babies are not on the same focal plane then a narrower aperture will be required, such as /5.6 or above to ensure that both babies faces are in focus.

Taking close-up shots of each twin is a must so that the little differences, if they are non-identical twins, may be appreciated by the parents. When lighting twins, you should ensure that one babys face is not in the complete shadow of the other baby.

Fig. 116 In this shot these adorable twins were posed together in a large basket containing fur  cheesecloth was then draped over the babies to create texture.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 117 Many twins will self-settle when posed together. Remember to photograph each twin both individually and together to create timeless memories for the parents.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 118 Close-up shots of twins are very important. Parents love to notice little differences between them.

ISO 160 1/160 f5.6 Twins can be beautifully photographed together in baskets or other props and one of the easiest ways of posing twins is to place them on their backs in a basket snuggled next to each other. Always be sure to take a full-length shot and then a close-up shot. Arranging the twins arms around each other creates a wonderfully cute shot that the parents will love.

Ensuring a gallery works together When photographing newborns you should always keep in mind the end product which you are going to sell. It is a good idea to create a certain number of images that have the same tones and colours; this ensures that when creating a wall gallery the clients are able to choose imagery that works well together. I shoot on a neutral backdrop on the basis that neutral tones will work in any home.

Fig. 119 A close-up, a full shot and another close-up create a beautiful gallery of three images.

The images in Figure 119 were shot with a gallery in mind. They work very well hung together, as none of them detracts from another  the colours and tones used are identical in each shot.

Photographing sequences of expressions can also work very well indeed for creating wall galleries. Shooting close-ups of the babys face creates the aaaaah factor and can result in a superb montage of images.

Completing the session At the end of the session the photographer should remember to put a nappy or diaper back on the baby and dress the baby for the parents. If the baby requires a feed before leaving then it is good practice to allow the client to remain in your studio so that they are able to do this. Hurrying a client out of the studio is unprofessional and should be avoided at all costs, no matter how long the photography session has lasted.

Finally, thank them for their time and give them a time estimate of when they can expect to view their images. If appropriate, give the client an estimate of when they can expect to receive a password to view their images on an online gallery. If you are a photographer who carries out viewing sessions in person then it is good practice to provide the client with an appointment to come back in seven to ten days. This not only ensures that the baby does not change too much between the time of the photography session and the viewing session, but it will also concentrate your mind on ensuring the session is edited in good time.

Chapter 7 Real-life case studies Case study 1 HELICOPTER MOTHER A photographer was carrying out an at-home session but the mother of the baby insisted on helping with the poses and did not wish for the photographer to move the baby. As a result the baby became restless and unsettled. The mother then proceeded to tell the photographer it was too hot in the room and opened all the windows. She then opened the door and let her two dogs into the room.

The scenario described here could have been avoided if the photographer had taken control of the session. The photographer could have politely asked the mother to sit down, relax and watch the session, explaining that the baby was in very safe hands.

Explain that it is better for the mother not to be too near because the baby will smell her milk. Also clarify that posing should be carried out by the photographer, so as not to wake the baby. Do not be afraid to be firm (but always very polite). As long as you explain to the client why she shouldnt be too near the baby during the session, she should understand and appreciate what you are doing.

It should also be explained that as the photographer you know exactly how to move the baby and pose her safely and beautifully. Presumably the client booked the photographer because she loved her imagery; it is worth reminding her of this, and that the photographer can be trusted to carry out the session without the mothers assistance.

With regard to the mother opening the windows, it is good practice for the photographer to ensure that she has a thermometer available for monitoring the room temperature. The parent should have been advised before the session that the room would be heated to around 80 degrees Fahrenheit to ensure that the baby is comfortable (given that the baby would not be wearing any clothes). As long as the room was no hotter than 80 degrees then the mother would only have needed reassurance of this by the photographer.

Having pets present during a newborn session is not advisable. Dogs in particular can be unpredictable around babies, no matter how docile their breed. Always remember that liability for the photography session and what happens during it remains with you, the photographer. It really is not worth the risk.

Case study 2 PHOTOGRAPHY AND VIDEOGRAPHY BY PARENT A photographer was carrying out a newborn session when she noticed that the father was taking videos of her in action, and also taking still photographs. Later that same day, the father emailed the photographs to the photographer having edited them. The viewing session resulted in no sales at all because the father was happy with what he had captured.

Once again, this is about taking control of the session. Photography and videography during the session by parents should never be allowed and it is good practice to ensure the parents are informed of this point in advance of the start of the session.

Whereas the fathers images would never have been as beautifully exposed or photographed as that of the newborn photographer, the father was happy with what he captured and didnt see the need to purchase any professional images. The photographers time was therefore completely wasted.

If a client is seen carrying out videography or photography they should politely be asked to stop.

Case study 3 MOTHER UNDRESSES BABY The photographers client arrived at the studio and the photographer asked her to undress her baby ready for the session. The mother duly pulled out her changing mat and put it on a cold floor. She laid the baby on the mat and quickly undressed him. The baby woke up and the photographer found it very difficult to settle the baby. The photographer reported that the babys feet were a purple-blue colour and baby was crying and then wide awake. The mother became stressed and the photographer then lost her confidence, and her shots were at best mediocre.

In this situation it is good practice for the photographer to undress the baby. The photographer should have taken the baby gently out of the car seat and when she was completely sure that the baby was asleep she should have gently started to undress him, while the baby was still in her arms. The room should have been heated to 80 degrees to ensure the baby would be warm enough with no clothes on. It is usually reasonably easy to undress a baby and still keep them asleep while they are in your arms as long as you take it slowly.

In the case described above, the mother putting the baby on a cold changing mat and then undressing her quickly would have startled and woken the baby. Once a baby is wide awake it can sometimes be difficult to resettle them quickly. In this situation the baby should have been quickly wrapped and cuddled back to sleep. It is easy to lose confidence when you are faced with a crying baby but in such situations it is important to remain calm and in control. Wrapping and shushing the baby and offering a feed if baby appears hungry in all likelihood should settle and calm the baby. It is usual for a mother to become upset if her baby is crying. That is a natural instinct. The important point here is that the photographer needed to reassure the mother, calm the baby and regain control of the session. It is good practice to have wraps readily available to hand.

Case study 4 BABY ON A STRICT FOUR-HOUR FEEDING ROUTINE About a quarter of the way through a photography session the baby awoke and was rooting. The photographer (with the mothers permission) offered a dummy/pacifier. The baby would suck at the dummy for a few seconds and then spit the dummy out, continuing to cry. The babys cries became more insistent and it was obvious to the photographer that the baby was hungry and needed a feed.

The photographer requested that the mother feed the baby but the mother reported that the baby was on a four-hourly routine and that she did not wish to feed her baby until the end of four hours. There was apparently no medical reason for the newborn baby to be on a four-hourly routine. The photographer, having attempted all other means of settling the baby, was unable to complete the session as the reluctance of the mother to feed her baby meant that the baby remained hungry and crying. The photographer had not pre-informed the parents that the baby would probably require a top-up feed at some point during the session.

In the situation described here the photographer should have informed the parents before the session, in the welcome guide, that the baby would in all likelihood require a top-up feed during the session. It is vital that the parents realize this so that they are prepared. The parent, on reading the welcome guide, would have contacted the photographer and explained that the baby would be on a four-hour feeding routine. At that stage the photographer could have explained that it would be necessary for the parent to feed the baby on demand for the purpose of the newborn session, and the parent would then at that stage have decided whether to proceed with the booking.

Case study 5 ABSENT PARENT This case study concerns a mobile photographer who would attend clients homes in order to carry out newborn sessions. On one occasion the mother had an eighteen-month-old as well as the newborn baby. The mother left the room for around 20 minutes and left the photographer with both the newborn and the toddler who then proceeded to knock over the light, which narrowly missed the baby. The toddler was fiddling with the equipment, meaning that the photographer had to deal with both the toddler and the newborn. She was calling for the mother but the mother did not come.

In the above situation, the photographer needed to set out the terms of her session in advance. She needed to ensure that the client knew that she must not leave the room. The photographer should have enquired as to whether there were any other siblings, and she should have insisted that any siblings were kept away, until they were needed for photographing. Siblings, particularly young toddlers, present a health and safety risk around light stands. The photographer should have ensured that there was a weight on the bottom of the light stand to avoid the stand tipping over. Further, she should immediately have called a halt to the session at the point the mother was not present and had left the photographer alone with the toddler. It is neither feasible, nor safe, to carry out a newborn session under these circumstances.

Case study 6 IMPATIENT CLIENT The photographer in this case study was relatively new to newborn photography. During every session she carried out, she felt the parents were becoming very impatient. This made her nervous and unable to concentrate. The parents had pre-booked lunch at a restaurant and did not wish to miss it. As a result they became cross (the father kept looking at his watch and asking how much longer the session was likely to take) and the photographer felt rushed and as a result did not take her time to refine the pose. She ended up disappointed with her images and lost her confidence.

This is a situation that could have been avoided. It is absolutely vital that the parents are pre-warned about how long a newborn session is likely to take. That way, they can plan their day accordingly. It is a good idea to tell the parents not to book anything in after the session because the session can only be taken at the babys pace and therefore cannot be rushed. It is very easy to feel intimidated by an impatient parent.

Case study 7 PROVIDING RAW IMAGES TO CLIENTS A newborn photographer who had been in business for approximately two years was asked by the client at a viewing and ordering appointment if she could please provide the RAW files as she had Photoshop and wanted to edit them herself. Not wanting to appear to be awkward, the photographer agreed.

One day, the photographer happened to stumble upon the clients Facebook page, and to her absolute horror she saw that the images she had shot so beautifully had been completely ruined by appalling editing. The photographer had been credited. The photographer immediately contacted the client and asked her to take them down from Facebook as they looked dreadful. The client refused.

The above situation could have been avoided by the client refusing very politely to hand over the RAW files. Many clients do not understand what a RAW file is. They hear the term and they think they need them; the fact is that they dont. The photographer needed to explain what a RAW file is, and that it is her practice to provide only beautifully edited images, as the editing also forms part of the style of her work. The photographer needed to explain that it is not studio policy to hand over RAW files and that JPEG files would be more than suitable for printing.

The photographer should not have allowed the client to edit the images and having this within her initial terms and conditions would have made this clear. This situation is not limited to RAW files of course; clients can edit JPEG images very easily. Again, to avoid this it should be stated within the terms and conditions that any editing or manipulation of the images is strictly forbidden.

Case study 8 COPYRIGHT A newborn photographers promotional literature and pricing structure included the words images on CD including copyright available.

One day, she saw in a baby magazine an image she had taken. The client had sold the photographers image to the magazine publishing house. As the photographer had released the copyright there was absolutely nothing she could do about this and therefore the work was used commercially. This meant that the photographer lost out not only on further revenue, but also on a credit for the image being used.

Copyright is a much-misunderstood term in the field of professional photography and photographers need to learn the meaning of it to avoid this situation occurring.

Copyright, as a rule, should never be released by the photographer. The reason for this is that once the photographer has released the copyright, she has lost total control over the images. The Copyrights, Design and Patents Act 1988 states that a photograph belongs to the person who took it. The exception to this is an employed photographer, in which case the copyright belongs to the employer, unless a contrary agreement has been made.

What this essentially means is that the purchased images may only be used by the client in the manner agreed between the photographer and the client.

Reproduction licence The difference between copyright and a reproduction licence is how the images may be used by the client. When a client asks if they own the copyright so that they can print the USB of images, that is really all they are interested in  being able to print the images. The client thinks they need to own the copyright to be able to do this, but the fact is that they do not. A reproduction licence means that the client may print the images for personal use, for friends and family, but they may not sell the images or benefit from commercial gain, as in the case study described above. It is very important to make it clear to the client the terms on which digital images are sold. A written contract is therefore advisable so that there can be no misunderstanding.

Case study 9 ARE THERE ANY MORE IMAGES?

A newborn photographer provided her client with a gallery of twenty-five beautiful images of their newborn baby girl. Shortly after viewing their gallery, the photographer received an email from the client asking, are there any more images? She was concerned that the client was unhappy, and proceeded to provide the client with four additional images, none of which were of the photographers usual standard. The additional images provided were slightly out of focus. This resulted in a complaint from the client.

This entire situation could have been avoided if the photographer had explained to the client that she had provided all images and that any images which were not up to standard were deliberately not provided.

Always remember to include only your best work; there was a reason why this photographer did not include the additional four images in her original gallery  they simply werent up to standard. It is always a mistake to start providing the client with work that you initially culled. As previously advised, the emphasis should be on quality, not quantity.

Chapter 8 Older babies As a newborn photographer you will be asked to carry out sessions for babies older than the newborn stage. It may be that a parent did not think to book a newborn photographer in advance and then decided that she would love newborn images of her baby, but the baby is now older than fourteen days. The photographer is advised against turning older babies away, as there is no reason why beautiful portraits may not be created.

With older babies you will need to consider the age of the baby so that you can consider how to approach the session. You will need to have the relevant props ready and ensure that the room is warm. Just as with a newborn session, the photographer should ensure that the baby is fully fed. You will also need a clear understanding of the capabilities of the age of the baby you are to be photographing.

THREE OR FOUR MONTHS OLD Babies at three and four months old are unable to sit. Some babies of this age are able to lift their head upright while lying on their tummy. If propped up then the baby will be able to hold her head still as she now has better muscle control than when she was a newborn baby. She will be able to provide a myriad of expressions including smiling and laughing for you to photograph and the parents will adore imagery that shows personality. Even though the baby cannot sit unaided, by being creative the photographer can still style the session to ensure plenty of variety of imagery for the client.

It is also a good idea for the photographer to take images not only with the baby dressed, but also with the baby undressed  just wearing a nappy or a diaper. The nappy or diaper may be hidden by using blankets creatively draped. The reason for taking images of baby showing their skin is because the baby will look much more like their real age. Dressed babies tend to look much older in photographs than they really are.

Fig. 120 This little three-month-old was propped up on her tummy. The bare skin shows off the babyishness of the baby.

Posing ideas Baby on tummy Some babies aged around four months will tolerate or even enjoy some tummy time. The photographer should ensure that the surface is soft; babies of this age are best photographed on the floor. A flokati or other soft rug is perfect for this set-up. The parent should be nearby and tummy time should be limited to a couple of minutes at the most. The baby will become tired quickly in this pose and therefore should not be left on their tummy for too long.

Figs 121 to 123 This little one was photographed from above. The baby was lying on his back.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 124 This sweet little three-month-old was lying on his back and had pulled the fabric over the side of his face momentarily. A quick capture made for a beautiful shot with the focus on the eye.

Lying on back A flokati placed on a beanbag works as a great base on which to photograph a three-month-old baby. The photographer should ensure there is a dip in the middle of the beanbag and then place the flokati on top. The baby should be placed into the dip of the beanbag on their back. Always remember to light the baby from the head downwards. Shooting up at the baby should be avoided at all times. Having the baby lay on her back provides a great opportunity for images. Be sure to take plenty of close-up images of expressions, which can later form a beautiful wall gallery for the client.

With parents It is a good idea to include images of the baby with its mother, with its father and with both. Photographing the parent with the baby from the chest upwards eliminates any worries the mother may have about still having a pregnancy tummy.

As well as images showing babys face, a shot showing the parents holding their baby with just the back of the head showing can also be beautiful.

Fig. 125 Three shots taken in sequence to be designed to be hung together. This tells a story of the emotion of the parents.

ISO 200 1/160 /6.3 SIX TO NINE MONTHS OLD Older babies may be photographed on a photographic paper backdrop.

Six to nine months is a wonderful stage at which to photograph a baby. They are full of personality and smiles. At six months old a baby can usually sit unaided. They can lie on their tummy and lift their head for good periods of time. Six- to nine-month-old babies may be starting to learn to crawl. If the photographer has a crawling baby in her studio she will need to be shooting with a reasonably fast shutter speed!

Babies of this age respond brilliantly to constant interaction. Talking, games of peekaboo, singing, the photographer will need to turn herself into a child entertainer for this session! It is a good idea to ask the parent to sit right beside the camera to entertain the child with peek-a-boo while you photograph.

As with three- and four-month-old babies, it is a good idea to photograph a six- to eight-month-old without a top, to enable you to capture the pure essence of the baby. This also provides an opportunity for a wider variety of shots. The photographer should ensure that she takes plenty of full length, three-quarter length and close-up images.

Fig. 126 A perfect capture of this little baby, who is able to push herself up from her tummy.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Figs 127 and 128 Six-month-old babies when lying on their back will often put their feet into their mouths. Adorable!

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Lying a baby down on a rug on their back and shooting from above provides a great opportunity for imagery. Having the baby lie down on their back and introducing their hands to their feet, and then photographing from the front can also provide a beautifully endearing shot.

Fig. 129 Extreme close-ups such as this shot of this babys beautiful eyes make captivating portraits.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 Fig. 130 A timeless black-and-white portrait.

ISO 160 1/160 /5.6 It should be remembered that at eight months a baby can develop separation anxiety (they do not wish to be separated from their parents). With this in mind, the photographer should not simply just put the baby in front of the camera as this is likely to induce tears. It is suggested that the mother sits with the baby first and then gradually moves out of shot once it is clear the baby is happy.

Fig. 131 One-year-old babies provide fabulous expressions. This little boy was full of beans and a joy to photograph.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Fig. 132 This nine-month-old baby was delightful at her session with lots of expression.

ISO 160 /5.6 1/160 Fig. 133 At nine months babies can sit confidently, and the bowl adds interest to the image.

ISO 160 /5.6 1/160 Fig. 134 This baby enjoyed being on her tummy. Shooting quickly means great expressions are not missed.

ISO 160 /5.6 1/160 Figs 135 and 136 Two images shot directly after each other provide very different expressions. Shooting close up keeps the focus on the expression.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 TWELVE MONTHS OLD At twelve months old some babies are already walking and if they are not, they are likely to be crawling very quickly! Photographing a twelve-month-old baby requires patience as it is likely that the baby will not sit still for very long at all! This is a perfect opportunity to capture crawling, standing and walking, which are all developmental milestones in a babys life.

Peek-a-boo, maintaining eye contact and chatting with the baby, having the parent put a light piece of material over the babys head and then pulling it off, singing, are all ideas which will elicit smiles, giggles and chuckles from a twelve-month-old.

Fig. 137 One-year-olds can often stand when holding their parents hands. A lovely milestone to capture.

ISO 160 1/160 /5 Fig. 138 Dont forget to lie baby down and shoot from above  an angle which often elicits smiles and giggles.

ISO 160 1/160 /5 Fig. 139 Hats can add interest and texture to a photograph, as shown here.

ISO 160 1/160 /4 Cake smash sessions are becoming very popular in the UK. The photographer usually provides a decorated cake and places this in front of the baby. The baby will delve into the cake and the photographer will photograph his reactions.

If you are a photographer who wishes to carry out cake smash sessions, your studio and the baby will get very messy indeed! It is therefore a good idea to carry out a portrait session first, and then bring out the cake! Some photographers follow this up with a splash session straight afterwards where baby is placed in a mini tub of warm water with bubbles. Whereas this can make for great imagery, the photographer should always remember that the safety of the baby is paramount, above any shot they wish to capture. Babies can drown in just a couple of inches of water and this should never be forgotten. A baby should never, ever, be left unattended.

MATERNITY PHOTOGRAPHY Whilst the subject of this book is newborn and baby photography, it would not be complete without a mention of maternity photography. As a newborn photographer it is highly likely that you will be asked to carry out a maternity or bump session. This is a great opportunity to create a lasting professional relationship with the client. If you create a beautiful set of maternity imagery for the client, then it is highly likely that she will book you to carry out the newborn session. It is essential to ensure that the client feels at ease during this session: she should be feeling comfortable, not to hot or too cold, and not feeling faint. A glass of water and fresh air should always be available.

BABYS FIRST YEAR When the client first contacts the photographer, the photographer should ascertain whether the client is still pregnant or whether she has had her baby. If the client is still pregnant, then the photographer can enquire whether the client would like a maternity or bump session. If the client answers positively then appropriate details may be given and an appointment booked.

Many clients love to have their babys milestones photographed. With this in mind offering a Babys First Year plan is a great idea. Generally these plans ensure that baby is photographed at newborn, six months and twelve months. This ensures that the client has a super reminder of her babys first year professionally captured. Many photographers offer incentives to book a babys first year plan, such as offering a small folio of imagery at the end of the last session. It is advised to carry out a viewing session at the end of each session to ensure that the client can order from each session. Ordering from all sessions at the end of twelve months is to be avoided if possible as the client spend tends to be much lower, and it is better for cash flow from the point of view of running a photography business if the client orders after each session.

Chapter 9 Post-production As this book is dedicated to the art of newborn photography, we will only touch briefly on some of the main points of post-production.

As a professional photographer, a large part of your task involves editing your images for your clients. It is therefore important that you have the correct equipment to enable you to carry out this work both effectively and efficiently.

MONITOR CALIBRATION Before carrying out any post-production, ensure that your monitor is properly calibrated. As a professional, image quality and accuracy are vitally important. Although computer monitors do aim to reproduce colours, brightness and contrast correctly, each monitor is different, and must be properly calibrated in order to ensure that the prints you receive back from your printer match what you see on your monitor. It is important that what you see is what you get.

A monitors calibration will change over time and often the colours will not look right on your monitor; for example, the skin tones may not be the correct colour. A monitor that isnt regularly calibrated may not show highlight and shadow detail correctly. Calibrators available to purchase include the Spyder range from Datacolor (www.datacolor.com) and the ColorMunki range (www.colormunki.com).

POST-PRODUCTION SOFTWARE Two of the best-known post-production software tools for photography are Adobe Lightroom and Adobe Photoshop.

Adobe Lightroom Lightroom is an essential software tool for processing and cataloguing your images. The software enables the photographer to organize, process and retouch a large number of images. Lightroom is also a RAW converter, meaning that it enables you to convert your files from RAW format to a more manageable format such as .jpeg.

Lightroom is incredibly fast at processing multiple images. It works in a non-destructive manner, meaning that the tweaks you make to your images are copied, leaving your original images intact. You can therefore cancel any adjustments at any point. Lightroom does not change the photograph: it records the edits separately into its database. A significant benefit of Lightroom is its ability to make adjustments to one image, and then sync those settings across to other images that were shot in the same lighting conditions.

Another benefit of Lightroom is the ability to create several virtual copies if you wish, meaning that you can play with each copy and use different editing techniques.

Lightroom is set out into modules: Library (which helps you organize and choose your images to edit), Develop (where you carry out the edits to your images), Map (this allows you to geotag your images), Book (this allows you to design and print a book), Slideshow (this sets up a slideshow for your clients to view), Print (this prepares your images for print in the sizes and paper types you wish  useful for those photographers who print their own work), and Web (this allows you to create an online gallery in various formats). When using Lightroom the photographer works in one module at a time.

Adobe Photoshop Photoshop is an incredibly powerful image editing software package for photographers and whereas there is some overlap between Lightroom and Photoshop in terms of capability, Photoshop provides you with much finer controls than Lightroom (for example, you cant create layer masks in Lightroom). Whereas Lightroom will provide the photographer with the tools to carry out 90 per cent of their editing, it is usually necessary, particularly with newborn baby skin, to bring the images into Photoshop for final refinement.

Both Lightroom and Photoshop are available on a monthly subscription service from www.adobe.com.

IMPORTING YOUR IMAGES After the session you should immediately (or as soon as is practical) import the images into Lightroom if that is your chosen software, and back up them up.

In the Develop mode in Lightroom, you will see a film strip of images across the bottom of the screen. Using the P for Pick letter on the keyboard, you can run through the images and press P to pick the images you wish to edit. Lightroom will place a small white flag in the corner of the chosen images in the film strip. Once you have selected the images you wish to edit, you can click show flagged images and only the images you have flagged will then show in the film strip at the bottom of the screen.

CORRECTING WHITE BALANCE White balance One of the first things the photographer will want to adjust, if she has not already custom-set her white balance using a grey card, is the temperature or white balance of the image.

The white balance can be adjusted using the temp slider. Adjust the slider left to cool an image and right to warm it up. White balance may also be adjusted by using the white balance selector tool. You can do this by either pressing the W key, or by selecting the eye dropper next to the white balance slider. Click on a part of your image that is white or neutral toned.

Tint In addition to setting the temperature, it is sometimes also necessary to adjust the tint of the image. Move the tint slider left if your image has a purple hue, and right if your image has a green hue.

Exposure The exposure slider allows you to adjust the exposure of the image artifcially. This is very useful in correcting an under- or over-exposed image. Be aware, however, that brightening an under-exposed image can increase the visible noise within the shadows of the image.

Contrast Moving the contrast slider to the left will decrease contrast; moving it to the right will increase contrast.

Highlights and whites Adjusting the highlight and whites slider allows you to recover parts of an image that appear blown out. It should be noted, however, that if parts of an image are completely over-exposed, there will be no detail to recover.

Shadows and blacks Adjusting these sliders allow you to give a little more detail to your image.

Clarity Adjusting this slider can make the image appear more or less defined.

Vibrance Adjusting the vibrance slider will make colours more intense.

Saturation Adjusting the saturation slider can make your image more colourful, but beware: if you slide this slider too far it can give the whole image a colour cast.

Adjustment brush Whereas the sliders in the control panel allow you to adjust the look of the entire image, the adjustment brush is a great little tool that allows you to apply corrections to a specific part of your image. The brush allows you to selectively adjust exposure, contrast and clarity, among other settings. This is very useful for, say, brightening just part of your image such as a subjects face.

Gradients At the top right-hand side of your Lightroom screen you will see a rectangle that represents gradients. Gradients may be added to an image to make the background darker or lighter, or to create any effect you wish  bear in mind, however, that unlike in Adobe Photoshop, you cannot erase an area of the image where you do not want the gradient to have an effect.

Hue, saturation, luminance Further down on the right-hand side of the Lightroom screen, you will see a panel called HSL (Hue, Saturation and Luminance). These sliders can be adjusted as necessary in order to create a pleasing image.

Installing presets In addition to creating your own Lightroom presets, you can download and install presets from the web into Lightroom so that you can use them at any time.

Purchase the relevant presets. These will usually come in a zipped file. You will need to save the file to your computer and then unzip the contents. Place the unzipped files in a temporary folder on your desktop.

Launch Lightroom and click to open the Develop module. Choose User Presets, and if wished, create a new folder for the presets by right-clicking on a master folder and selecting new folder.

Once you have created the new folder, right-click it and select Import. Navigate to your desktop, select the folder you saved earlier, and click Import. The presets will be added to your Lightroom Preset collection.

You can rename a preset folder by right clicking it and choosing rename. You can also delete a folder if you wish or remove individual presets by right-clicking the preset and selecting Delete.

There are various presets available on the market: try www.bestlightroompresets.com, which are my go-to presets when editing newborns in Lightroom.

COLOUR CONSISTENCY It is very important that the final gallery presented to the client has consistent colour. That is to say that the white balance of every image should be correct. Images shot in the same light on the same blanket should look the same with regard to exposure, and the babys skin tone should be identical in every image. This can be achieved by correcting one image in Lightroom and then syncing the settings across all of the images that were shot in the same conditions.

SAMPLE WORKFLOW You can maximize your efficiency by learning how to edit effectively both in Lightroom and Photoshop and the following is an example of my workflow. I use the LightroomPhotoshopLightroom method, which makes for efficient and easy editing. This means that images are initially edited in Lightroom, taken into Photoshop for further editing and then returned to Lightroom for final adjustments. My newborn workflow using Lightroom and Photoshop is described below.

Import Import your images into Lightroom using your card reader, your hard drive, or your external hard drive. If you are importing your images from a card reader or external hard drive be sure that you are adding the original images into a folder on your main hard drive otherwise you will lose the images once the card is removed! You will see the images appear in the library module.

You can then apply copyright information, contact information and keywords at this point. It is good practice to set 1:1 previews so that you dont have to wait for each image to render if you zoom in on it.

Organize Always keep it simple and just have one catalogue. Having multiple catalogues can become difficult to manage.

Once your images have imported, select all images, and click on the plus sign next to collections. Choose create collection and then choose a name  it is good practice here to use the same name as the original folder, or the clients name. Always choose something that it is easy for you to find later. Then click create.

Cull images You can use the P key to pick images you want to edit. Lightroom will place a little white flag in the corner of the image on the lm strip at the bottom of your screen. If you accidentally pick an image, use the U key to unpick it.

Once you have done this, you can set the filter to show only those picked images (choose flagged from the bottom right hand corner of the screen).

Edit Now choose the Develop module (click D). Always ensure that your camera profile is correctly set in Lightroom. Lightroom will usually have preset this to Adobe Standard. I prefer to change the setting to camera neutral. This is because this setting eliminates additional saturation, which is particularly useful when editing newborn babies.

Zoom in on each image you wish to include to check it is in focus. If there are focus issues on any images, these should be discarded (press U for unpick).

Turn on the highlight and shadow warnings with the J key to ensure you dont have clipped highlights or muddy shadows.

Check the white balance Ensure that the images have a pleasing white balance. Adjust the temperature and tint sliders if necessary and then sync the settings with all the images from the same session that were shot in the same lighting conditions. Ensure that any whites present in the image look white.

SAFEGUARD YOUR IMAGES Always ensure that you make back-up copies of all your images. There are various suitable cloud-based systems available for this, such as Dropbox.

Check exposure Check the exposure of the image. The right-hand side of the Lightroom screen will show a histogram box. Ensure that there are no blown-out highlights. If you see blown-out highlights then these may be adjusted by moving the highlights slider to the left. It is also possible to adjust selected areas.

EDITING SKIN TONES Vibrancy increases cooler tones like green and blue, whereas saturation increases warmer tones like red and orange. To increase the colour of an image without ruining a babys skin tone you can increase the vibrance in images that appear to be blown-out by using the adjustment brush as described earlier.

Adjust the exposure if necessary by moving the exposure sliders either left or right. If you have lit your subject properly then your images should be correctly exposed at the outset. The exposure slider affects the midtones of the image.

Adjust highlights Check your image to see if there are any areas where the highlights have been blown. If you see blown highlights then adjust the highlights slider to the left, which may bring back more detail into the image.

Adjust whites The whites slider will adjust any area that has been blown out.

Adjust blacks The blacks slider will adjust the dark areas of the image; if you have lost detail, moving the blacks slider to the left will bring detail back into the shadows.

Editing very red newborn babies In Lightroom there are two additional sliders called lights and darks. Moving the darks slider to the right will help eliminate some of the red and will produce more of the creamy skin tone which newborn photographers love. Moving down to HSL (Hue, Saturation, Luminance), you will see eight sliders representing red, orange, white, green, aqua, blue, purple and magenta. Always select the hue first, and then move the red slider to the right towards the oranges. You only need to move this a small amount, say +10, to see the effect it has on your image. In overly red babies, you can also choose saturation and then move the red slider down a little. Be very careful not to take out too much saturation, or your baby will end up looking very unwell indeed.

You can also make use of the Target Adjustment Tool TAT in the HSL panel. Click on the TAT, click on a selected area of babys skin and then drag down. The sliders will then adjust. You can adjust further as required by using the sliders if need be.

TIME-SAVING TIP Remember that you can save time by syncing the settings from one image right across all the other images that have been shot in the same conditions. This results in a far more efficient workflow.

Editing jaundiced babies When editing jaundiced babies, you can again make use of the Target Adjustment Tool. Be careful to avoid eyes, mouth and hair. This is an incredibly useful tool to use when editing newborns.

Editing purple hands and feet As above, the Target Adjustment Tool will be your best friend here!

Adjust clarity If you want your babys skin to glow, then choose the Target Adjustment Brush and decrease the clarity slider to soften the skin detail. Paint where needed to make adjustments. You should take care to avoid eyes, mouth, hair and hairlines. If you want to enhance part of the subject, such as a beautiful blanket the baby may be wrapped in, then you can increase the clarity.

Crop and straighten You may need to crop and straighten your image. Always ensure that the gold padlock on the right hand side of the screen is locked to ensure that it remains as the as shot size, unless you want to change the crop ratio to, say, a square crop. Lightroom also has an incredibly useful feature which allows you to get a head start on composition when cropping an image. Simply press the O key when you are in the crop mode, and you can cycle through various overlays such as rule of thirds, grid, diagonal, golden ratio, golden spiral and aspect ratios. To straighten an image, simply click on the level bar to the left of the angle and drag it to where you would like your image to straighten.

Retouch baby skin Adding light Sometimes it is necessary to add a little more light into areas of your image. A fabulous tool for this is using one of the three Baby Retouch Light the Face brushes (normal, cool or warm). Alternatively an adjustment brush with increased brightness can bring light into faces or areas of an image.

Removing blemishes with spot removal tool (Q on the keyboard) When using the spot removal tool, choose Clone or Heal, which is the same as the Cloning Tool or Healing Brush in Photoshop. For most spots, the Heal option works best, especially in clear areas like a blanket or wall. Clone would be a good option if youre working along the edge of a subject. You should ensure that you do not overuse this feature unless you have lots of RAM. This is a very memory-intensive process, but it is very effective for taking out blemishes. It is best not to get too close to the edge of the image. You can adjust the brush size with the mouse wheel or slider.

TIME-SAVING TIP Pressing the x key will allow you to quickly change the bounding box from portrait to landscape orientation  a quick way of choosing which orientation you would prefer for your image.

Remember, it is good practice only to remove blemishes that would disappear within ten days, otherwise, leave it in  you dont want to offend the parents and certainly birthmarks should never be removed unless you are specifically requested to do so by the parents. Acceptable blemishes to remove on newborn portraits are: flaky or peeling skin; baby acne; milia; blotches; rashes or cradle cap. Unless the baby has only a very few spots to remove or retouch, this process is easier and less memory-intensive to handle in Photoshop. We will discuss round-trip editing from Lightroom to Photoshop later in this chapter.

Adjustment brush (K on your keyboard) This is certainly one of the most valuable tools in Lightroom. When using this brush, click O to see the mask you have painted. Hold down Alt/Opt while brushing to erase. Click New to start a new brush. If you wish you can apply the same brush over and over by clicking New, which doubles the effect each time. Click O again to hide the mask. To resize the brush you can use the scroll wheel on your mouse or the square bracket keys on your keyboard.

To reset any slider, you can double click the name (e.g. Exposure).

Fade Effect When using the adjustment brush, click on the triangle to the far right of Effect. This will open a box with a master slider so you can increase or decrease the effect of any of the above listed image adjustments.

Round trip baby retouching/editing: from Lightroom to Photoshop and back If there is blotchy, dry, flaky skin, spots and other conditions on the babys skin, it will be necessary to carry out round-trip editing in Lightroom. It is good practice to import the files to Lightroom, do as much as you can there, then use Photoshop as an External Editor. Once youve made those adjustments in Photoshop, you can save the file (Ctl/Cmd + S) and it will automatically be returned to Lightroom  in order, as a PSD or TIFF file  you can choose which format. This is the key to fast, easy and effective editing and will help you achieve lovely images for your clients. You should keep all your images in Lightroom, because you will have all image versions in one place for ease of reference in the future.

Colour balance and noise reduction Lightroom allows you to adjust colour balance and noise reduction in just parts of an image if you wish.

Temp/Tint is for refining and adjusting the colour balance on just a specific part of an image if necessary.

Sharpness is for adding a little sharpness in a specific area of an image.

Noise is for painting on extra noise reduction in out-of-focus areas without over-smoothing others. This is very useful if banding appears in your image  simply paint onto the banded areas.

Graduated Filter (M) is a great tool to bring down a blown-out background, darken an overlit side of an image, even out different white balances or to insert a partial vignette. Use brush presets for this.

TIME-SAVING TIP: PUT YOUR LIGHTROOM XMPS IN THE CLOUD To avoid duplicating all the hours of work you do on your Lightroom images in the event of a computer failure, it is good practice to upload them to your FTP or Dropbox for backup. Make sure theyre carefully labelled with the job title and date. If you have both your RAW or original files on site along with the matching xmps in the cloud, you can survive a total computer failure.

Export Once you have carried out all the adjustments you need in Lightroom, you will need to export them. This can be done by clicking file then export, which will bring up an instruction box.

From here the photographer can control to where the images can be exported, the resolution at which she wishes them to be exported and whether she wishes to apply sharpening, plus a myriad of other options. She will also need to choose the format in which she would like the image exported. You can select whether the images are to be immediately opened in Adobe Photoshop. Once the settings have been selected, click Export. If you have selected the option to have the images opened in Photoshop, you will see that Photoshop will open and the images will appear.

Photoshop adjustments Flaky skin: Photoshop is the perfect software in which to deal with the flaky skin that newborns so often have. You should ask the mother at the session whether she wishes for the flaky skin to be removed in post-production. I prefer to use the Patch tool to eliminate flaky skin. Simply duplicate your layer and then select the patch tool from the tool box. The photographer can then proceed to draw around an area of flaky skin and drag to a nearby area of clear skin. Make sure that the patch tool is in Source mode, which will be shown at the top of your screen. You will see the flaky skin is then replaced with clear skin.

Removal of blemishes: as previously noted, you should be careful not to insult your client by removing birthmarks, strawberry marks or similar unless explicitly asked for by the client. A good rule of thumb is to remove anything that would self-heal within two weeks, such as milk spots, flaky skin, etc. Blemishes such as spots may be removed using the patch tool as outlined above.

Red skin: if the photographer has not already carried out adjustments in Lightroom or does not subscribe to Lightroom, then the issue of red skin will need to be addressed in Photoshop. The best way to deal with this is to add a hue/saturation layer. The Reds may then be adjusted as necessary. A starting point might be to adjust the hue of the Reds by +10, decrease the saturation of the Reds by -4 and adjust the lightness by +10. This is only a guide, however; you should adjust your settings as you see fit. Remember that decreasing the saturation of the Reds too much will result in an unwell looking baby with grey skin tones and should be avoided.

PRESENTING IMAGES TO THE CLIENT Whether you host images online or you carry out viewings in person for clients, the images must always look their best. It is a good idea to host in-person viewing sessions because then you are in control of how the client views the imagery, whether on a lovely large screen, or projected. Setting up an appointment with the client ensures that their mind is not wandering elsewhere, and they can give their full attention to your beautiful imagery. It is a good idea to ask if they have a relative who can look after any children so that the parents come alone. There is a variety of software packages that can produce beautiful slideshows, including Animoto (www.animoto.com). It is important to ensure that you always use royalty-free music if setting an image to a slideshow.

If presenting images online, the photographer should ensure that every single image is water-marked. Unfortunately many clients see nothing wrong with taking a screenshot of an image, or saving an image to their desktop that they may later have printed. Watermarking your imagery, while not completely eliminating image theft, will go some way to reducing this, as it acts as a deterrent. The photographer should give the client a deadline by which to come back to them with their order. If the photographer allows weeks to pass, the client will lose interest in the images, as the baby will have changed significantly during that time.

Products A wide variety of products for professional photographers to offer their clients is now available from a huge range of suppliers. The photographer should try not to draw up an over-complex pricing structure. Keeping the product list and pricing relatively simple will make the clients decision on what to buy much easier.

Similarly, the photographer should choose the products she wishes to represent her brand. The photographer should try to keep it simple and not offer too many products from too many different suppliers. This only complicates matters for the client.

The photographer should choose a supplier who understands the need for exceptional client service, a supplier who will not let you down with delivery and deadlines, and who will provide a beautiful product that shows off the imagery in its very best light.

NEWBORN PHOTOGRAPHY TRAINING Remember, it is essential to gain specialist newborn photography training before attempting to pose a baby yourself. Being a fully trained newborn photographer will not only elevate your work, but it will build trust and confidence in the relationship between you and your client. For expert 1:1 newborn photography training in the art and/or business of newborn photography, contact the author, Melanie East AMPA, at www.theartofthenewborn.co.uk. I have taught hundreds of professional and amateur photographers how to pose and photograph newborn babies safely, teaching worldwide, and also on behalf of the Master Photographers Association. My 1:1 masterclasses, which take place in my studio, include the following aspects: Safety Posing Transitional posing Lighting Working with textures and tones Working with props Working with parents Business and marketing advice 1:1 masterclasses are tailor-made to the photographers exact requirements.

ASSOCIATIONS There are many professional photographic organizations available to both amateur and professional photographers. The best-known are listed below.

Master Photographers Association (www.thempa.com) The MPA is a highly respected and professional qualification organization for photographers. It is run on a not-for-profit basis, meaning that the Association has its members best interests at heart. At the time of writing, the MPA offers a range of benefits to its members including subsidized training, a mentoring scheme and a selection of free seminars led by esteemed professional photographers. Members are encouraged to qualify as Master Photographers. MPA qualifications are highly sought after and are recognized worldwide. The MPA produces an excellent bi-monthly magazine, Master Photographer.

British Institute of Professional Photographers (www.bipp.com) The BIPP is another highly professional qualification organization for professional photographers, with over a hundred years experience. The BIPP also offers a mentoring and qualification scheme and is very highly regarded.

The Societies (www.swpp.co.uk) The SWPP stands for the Society of Wedding and Portrait Photographers. It is a professional association for wedding and portrait photographers. The SWPP is well known for its annual convention.

Wedding and Portrait Photographers International (www.wppi.com) WPPI is an international organization for photographers based in America. It is very well known for its annual convention. WPPI offers, among other benefits, education, vendor discounts, subscriptions to photography magazines and an online video library with access to hours of educational footage.

About the author Melanie East AMPA is one of the UKs leading newborn photographers. She changed career from lawyer to professional photographer and has never looked back. As well as running a highly successful newborn photography business she also teaches the business and art of newborn photography to amateur and professional photographers. She is highly respected among her professional photography peers and clients. Melanie has taught hundreds of photographers over the years and has built a reputation for producing exceptional newborn photography training. She is a judge for the annual Master Photographers Association International Awards and is an MPA Mentor. She has developed a new Master Photographer Licentiate qualification in Newborn Photography and will be a judge for the new qualification panels. Melanie is described by the Master Photographers Association as  A wonderfully talented photographer whose specialism within the newborn photography industry is nationally recognized.

Melanie provides 1:1 tuition for photographers wishing to specialize within the field of newborn photography. Details may be found at her website www.theartofthenewborn.co.uk.

Melanie is one of THE best newborn baby trainers around, providing down-to-earth and honest business advice, demonstrating achievable lighting and posing techniques, whilst sharing valuable insight and inspiration. Melanies training provides professional photographers who are serious about newborn photography with confidence, technique and vision of what can be achieved in this genre of photography when you listen, learn and do.

Clare Louise FMPA, CEO of The Master Photographers Association List of suppliers Cameras and lenses Canon: www.canon.co.uk Nikon: www.nikon.co.uk Calumet: www.calphoto.co.uk Lighting The Flash Centre: www.theflashcentre.com Software, actions and presets Adobe: www.adobe.com Presets: www.bestlightroompresets.com Newborn photography training The Art of the Newborn (Melanie East): www.theartofthenewborn.co.uk Post-production training Marko Nurminen: www.markonurminen.com Photographers studio management software Light Blue: www.lightbluesoftware.com Albums SWPM: www.swpm.co.uk GraphiStudio: www.graphistudio.co.uk One Vision Imaging: www.onevisionimaging.com Loxley Colour: www.loxleycolour.com Wall art suppliers Kaleidoscope: www.kaleidoscope-framing.co.uk Loxley Colour: www.loxleycolour.com Print Foundry: www.theprintfoundry.co.uk One Vision Imaging: www.onevisionimaging.com USB suppliers One Vision Imaging: www.onevisionimaging.com Flashbay: www.flashbay.com 3XM: www.3xmsolution.com Prop suppliers Backdrops and newborn props Click Props: www.clickprops.co.uk Baby Prop Shop: www.babypropshop.co.uk Hats, blankets, knitted items and wraps Big Crocodile Knits: www.bigcrocodile.co.uk Click Props: www.clickprops.co.uk Baby Prop Shop: www.babypropshop.co.uk Easy Wrap: www.cakesmashprops.co.uk Grandma Joyces Little Knits: www.facebook.com/Grandma-Joyces-Little-Knits Flokatis Baby Prop Shop: www.babypropshop.co.uk Posing beanbags Baby Prop Shop: www.babypropshop.co.uk Glossary Aperture The hole in the lens through which light passes to reach the sensor in the camera.

Catchlights White squares or circles which can be seen in the subjects eyes, caused by the reflection of light.

Contrast The range of tones in an image, which vary from light to dark.

Depth of field The area of the image which is in sharp focus.

Distortion A lens defect causing straight lines to bow out towards the edge of an image.

DSLR Digital Single Lens Reflex. A digital camera that combines the mechanism and optics of a single lens reflex camera with a digital imaging sensor, as opposed to using photographic film.

Exposure The amount of light reaching the cameras sensor, which is determined by ISO, aperture and shutter speed.

Exposure triangle The three camera settings which determine exposure (ISO, aperture and shutter speed).

stop The size of the aperture.

Histogram A graph displaying the number of pixels in each area of light or dark in an image. Assists in determining correct exposure.

ISO (International Organization for Standardization) The measure of the cameras sensitivity to light.

JPEG A widely accepted image format which uses compression to reduce the size of image files.

Memory card A removable file storage device inserted into the camera, which stores the images captured.

Metering The cameras internal measuring system for measuring exposure settings.

Noise A common term used to describe random speckles scattered over the image, similar to grain produced by film cameras.

Over-exposed An over-bright image which has occurred as a result of incorrect exposure.

RAW The image file format which contains all uncompressed original image data. Requires further processing in post-production.

TIFF (Tagged Image File Format) The image file format that has no loss of detail, but does not require further processing (unlike RAW files).

Under-exposed An incorrectly exposed image where the image is too dark.

White balance A control in camera enabling the photographer to match the colour temperature of different light.

Acknowledgements A huge thank-you to my husband Simon for his unconditional support when I decided to jump from lawyer to professional photographer. His love and patience have allowed me to forge a highly successful career within the newborn photography industry, and without him it would not have been possible.

My everlasting love and thanks go to my daughter Amelia, whose never-ending patience when mummy just wants to practise shooting in this beautiful light enabled me to practise and perfect imagery.

A special thank-you to my parents, for always encouraging me to strive to do the very best I can in life, and for their unconditional love.

To Anna Bennett who initially noticed that I had the eye for photography and encouraged me to take it further. Her encouragement when I wavered during the early days ensured that I continued to pursue a career which I have grown to love.

To my best friend Anna Hill, who has always shown me never-ending love, support and encouragement. I dont know where I would be without her.

To Marcia Gold, for teaching me how to edit images of babies effectively and efficiently using post-production software, and for developing fabulous presets and tools; without these I would be stuck behind my computer day and night in an editing nightmare!

Id like to thank all of my lovely clients whose babies feature in this book; without them this book would not have been possible.

Index aperture 13, 21, 22, 24, 26-27, 78, 110 awake babies 30-31, 42, 73, 74, 77, 84 assistants 38, 40, 54, 56, 57, 61, 63, 78 beanbag 16, 33-35, 50 black and white 16, 20, 93 camera 19, 23-24 case studies 83-87 circulation 41, 52, 70 client relationship 9-11 composition 21, 104 contrast 13, 23, 99, 110 composites 40, 42 cropped sensor 19 crop ratios 104 depth of field 27 detail 23, 57-58 digital image file formats 20 dslr 20, 110 editing 99-105 exposure 20, 24-26, 110 exposure triangle 26, 110 external hard drive 102  stop 27 feathering light 16, 48, 50 file formats 20 focal length 21, 27 focus 23-24 full frame sensor 19 golden ratio 104 heat 10, 23, 38, 69, 84 histogram 19, 25, 67, 103, 110 hue 100-101, 103, 106 iso 26-27 JPEGs 19-20, 86, 110 lenses 19, 21-25 lightroom 99-106 low key 11, 61 macro 22-23, 52, 58-59, 74 masterclass 107 metering light 24-25, 110 monitor calibration 99 natural light 10, 14, 16, 19, 22 negative space 55, 58 noise 27, 100, 105, 110 older babies 77, 89-96 pacifiers 38 parents 7, 10-11, 32, 37-38, 47, 64-65 photoshop 99-106 pixels 110 posing 41, 50-80 post production 99-106 premature babies 44 preparation 29 props 29, 33-34, 38 room temperature 38, 69, 83 safety 11, 14, 33, 37-38, 40, 41-42, 45, 49, 54, 57, 61, 63, 68, 72, 74, 85, 96 saturation 101-103, 106 sensors 19 settling 37, 39, 42, 67, 78, 85 shadows 13-14, 25, 49, 100-103 shutter speed 21-22, 24, 26-27, 91, 110 siblings 32, 62-63, 85 sleep 10, 42-43 soft boxes 14, 34, 49 spotters 41, 56 studio 10, 29, 32, 37 studio lighting 13, 16, 49 style 11, 32 TIFF 20, 105, 110 training 107 twins 10, 78-79 white balance 25-26, 100-105, 110 white noise 43 wrapping 41, 43, 68, 70-72, 84